<title>Review of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Sector: Ethiopia</title>
<section>1</section>
I. GENERAL OVERVIEW OF THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY
1.1 Macroeconomic Environment
Ethiopia is classified as being among the least developed countries in the world. Its economy, structurally deficient and backward, has been declining during the past seventeen years. In 1989, the Gross Domestic Product at constant prices was Br12.36billion (US$5.97billion at previous rate). Recent estimates show that since 1987/88, the GDP has been on a continuous decline, with a record fall in 1990/91 where it declined by 5.6%. Agriculture plays a dominant role in the economy, with a contribution to GDP estimated at 38.8% in 1989.
The population is rising fast with the rate of increase accelerating over time. By the end of 1992, the population had reached approximately 52million, with an annual growth rate of 2.9%. By the year 2000 the population is expected to reach 68million. GDP per caput, having failed to return to the pre-drought level (1984) of around Br230, has settled on a plateau of about Br220 (US$106 at previous rate^1).
During the last decade, Ethiopia has been a low-inflation country, i.e. about 5% per annum, notably as a result of its prudent fiscal policy. However, in 1990/91 inflation was estimated to be in excess of 10%.
From 1974/75 to 1988/89, imports have increased at an average rate of about 8% per annum, while exports achieved a growth rate of only 1.4% per annum, mainly through stagnation of agricultural exports. The resource balance has therefore shown an increasing deficit.
As a result of the policies of the past several years and the internal problems, the Transitional Government of Ethiopia (TGE) inherited a shattered economy in June 1991. Much of the industrial production had come to a standstill, while essential infrastructure had been destroyed. About half of the total population would now fall under accepted poverty thresholds.
In November 1991, the TGE adopted a new economic policy by replacing the centrally planned economy with a market-based economy. In October 1992, the currency was devalued to Br5 per USdollar, as part of an integrated programme of economic reform. The devaluation is expected to provide new incentive to export at the official exchange rate, and to stimulate economic development.
1.2. The Role of Fisheries in the Economy
Until recently Ethiopia had a solid fish potential estimated at over 80 000 t/year, of which about 50 000 t/year from marine waters. Despite substantial water resources and crucial need for food supply, fish production however has stagnated under 5,000 t/year due mainly to the lack of tradition in fishing and related activities. Commercial fishing is a rather new practice in the Rift Valley Lakes which started in the fifties, while riverine fisheries are still mainly exploited on a subsistence basis.
From the end of the eighties, the former Government had placed emphasis on the development of the fishery sector with a view to reach food self-sufficiency, with the support of projects. At present, in conjunction with a growth in the number of fishermen due to unemployment in other sectors and liberalization of the economy, fishing activities are substantially developing.
The contribution of fisheries to GDP is very small, and would remain so even if the maximum economic yields were actually extracted. Based on annual production estimated at 5,500 t from lakes and reservoirs, the value of fish landed in Ethiopia is about Br5.5million ($US1.1million) at producers' prices averaging Br1/kg. In comparison, the total contribution of forestry, fishing and hunting was estimated at Br0.29billion for 1988/89.
The total number of fishermen, including those from riverine fisheries, is about 2,250 which would show an increase in fishing employment by roughly 50% over the last four years. Furthermore, 220 persons are employed by the Fish Production and Marketing Corporation (FPMC), while a smaller number of licensed and unlicensed private traders are directly employed in fisheries. In production areas where informal marketing has developed, the sector provides a livelihood for a significant part of the population.
All the production is consumed within Ethiopia since fish export activities are nowadays inexistent. In the recent past, the FPMC tried to develop fish export to Middle East markets, with a maximum of 57t exported in 1989/90 to Saudi Arabia. Fish imports are mainly composed of canned fish and represent about 100 t/year.
Table 1 gives indicates on trends in fish supply from 1982 to 1992. Based on a total fish supply of 5 600 t/year, the national average fish consumption is about 100g/year per caput, the lowest in Africa. However, estimated fish consumption in a small radius around waterbodies (Awassa, Arba Minch, Gambella) can be placed at approximately 10kg/year per caput. Fish eating habits in Ethiopia have been mainly influenced by the Orthodox Church which encourages the eating of fish during 80 days of fasting.
Table 1: Total Fish Supply (1983-1992)
Inland prod.
(mt)
Marine prod.
(mt)
Imports
(mt)
Total fish
supply (mt)
Source: FRDD, FPMC, Lake Fisheries Development Project (LFDP),
FAO/TCP/ETH/1357, FIPPDAT
Although physical conditions allow for development of aquaculture, no tradition as such exists in Ethiopia. Since 1975, only culture-based stock enhancement operations have been carried out by a governmental station.
Direct annual contribution of the fisheries and aquaculture sector to Government revenues is about Br750 000. It is made of sales tax of 5% on purchases of fish, and income tax from fishermen's associations. However, much of the fish is beyond the reach of taxation, being produced and marketed informally. Fishermen's associations also pay small royalties to the Government for the right to exploit their local fishery, but more precise information is lacking.
<section>2</section>
II. THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE SECTOR
2.1 Situation of Capture Fisheries
2.1.1 Natural Resources and Fisheries Potential
The seasonal variations in Ethiopia are under the influence of the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), the main rainy season occurring between June and August. Around March, a high pressure system develops over the region and brings moist, easterly winds ascending over the Highlands and producing the "small rains". Rainfall is subject to important variability according to altitude. In general, plateaux over 2 500m receive 1 400 - 1 800 mm/year, mid-altitude regions (600 - 2 500m) receive 1 000-1 400mm/year, and coastal lowlands get less than 200mm/year.
Air temperature conditions are function of altitude and determine five agro-climatic zones, ranging from alpine-type to desert. There can be considerable amplitude between average and extreme temperatures of various regions. For instance, the average temperature in Addis Ababa is 16,3° C, meanwhile temperatures below O° C can often occur in December-January.
Hydrological system derives from six major drainage basins. The water area includes about 7 400 Km² of lakes and reservoirs, and 7 000 Km of rivers. Most of fishing areas are found in natural lakes, of which Lake Tana is the largest one. The average altitude of water bodies is 1 750m, while surface-water temperature range between 22 and 26° C. The Rift Valley south of Addis Ababa contains a system of small to medium-sized lakes, some of which are saline. The most fished lakes are Ziway, Langano, Awassa, Chamo and Abaya. Also exploited for fishing are the two largest reservoirs, Fincha and Koka.
Riverine fishing activities are performed mostly on two of the rivers, the Baro near Gambela in the western part of the country and the Omo in the southern area near the border with Kenya.
A hundred local fish species have been identified, while the bulk of the production is made of Tilapia, Lates, Barbus, Bagrus, Clarias and Labeo species. Approximately 80% of the catch is tilapia, although Nile perch is caught in large quantities on Lakes Chamo and Abaya, as well as in major riverine fisheries. Most of the remainder of the lake catches consists of catfish and barbus.
Estimates of the potential yield have been calculated from different methods on individual lakes (surface area, mean depth, and conductivity). According to the method used, differences are large. It is believed that in Ethiopia, conservative estimates depending on experimental fishing - as recently initiated by the Lake Fisheries Development Project (LFDP) - would reflect more the reality than the empirical formulae because of the high turbidity of most of the water bodies. In the face of such uncertainty, fish potential yield can be conservatively estimated at between 30 000t and 40 000t/year for the main water bodies (FAO, 1993). Furthermore, the riverine fishery potential is roughly estimated at about 5 000t/year (Aubray, 1975).
Table2 gives estimates of fish potential and landings by area. Present production in most water bodies, which is conservatively estimated at about 5 500t/year, is far below the estimated potential yields, i.e. about 20% in total. However, based on field survey, it is possible that Lakes Awasa and Ziway are near to being heavily exploited (small size of the catch, declines in landings, ...). But in general, most of fisheries, although requiring resource monitoring, leave considerable room for further expansion of the production.
Table 2: Empirically predicted potential yield and production for the main water bodies
Altitude
(m)
Area
(km²)
Mean depth (m)
Potential annual yield (mt)
Production
(mt)
Rift Valley
Chamo 
3 500 ^a/
1 350 ^c/
Abaya 
9 800 ^a/
Awassa 
600 ^a/
660 ^c/
Shala 
1 100 ^a/
Langano
1 300 ^a/
320 ^c/
Abijata
1 700 ^a/
Ziway 
4 500 ^b/
2 000 ^d/
Koka 
na
2 400 ^b/
100 ^c/
Other areas
Tana 
24 900 ^b/
1 000 ^d/
Fincha 
1 700 ^b/
na
TOTAL 
a/
Method used to predict potential yields is based on mean depth
^b/ Method used to predict potential yields is based on area
c/
Production estimated in 1990 ^
d/
Production estimated in 1992/93
Source: Vanden Bossche and Bernacsek (FAO 1991), Allix (1987)
UNDP/FAO (1982), FRDD, FPMC, LFDP, FAO/TCP/ETH/0052
2.1.2 Fisheries and Environment
The source of major pollutants affecting Ethiopian lakes and rivers are factories, agriculture and sewage. Mineral extraction from Lake Abijata could affect the fish stock in some way. It is also claimed that effluents from the tannery at Koka Reservoir and the textile industries in Awassa and Arba Minch have affected the concerned fisheries. However, in the absence of a data collection system, it is difficult to estimate any consequential economic loss for the fisheries industry. The same applies to the possibility of adverse effects to fisheries from the use of agricultural fertilisers.
The main reason for the ecological degradation in the country is likely to be in close relation with the increasing degree of deforestation which accelerates the drying up of water bodies and increases the turbidity of waters. However, large reforestation programmes for the Rift Valley are envisaged in the near future. In this context, the introduction of fish smoking technology should be discouraged.
Multipurpose dam projects can also have adverse economic consequences on the sector. It has been suggested that the dam construction on River Omo has adversely affected the anadromous fish which migrate from Lake Turkana to spawn in the river. Furthermore, Valley dwellers displaced to uplands increase population and farming pressure on marginal and steep sloping land, increasing soil erosion together with silt and chemical pollution of streams. It can also be noted that Reservoir Fincha is faced with problems of floating grass, which hamper gillnetting.
2.1.3 Fishing Technology and Socio-Economic Characteristics of the Industry
Ethiopian fishery is entirely artisanal. Most of fishing vessels, whose number is about 600, are made of papyrus or scirpus and are not motorized with the exception of about 30 boats on Lake Tana.
In the Rift Valley, canoes tend to be gradually replaced in some of the lakes by wooden punts with oars (4m x 1.7m x 0.55m). Fishermen mostly use one-man rafts, whose carrying capacity is extremely limited. However, the vessels give fishermen access to the entire surface of the Rift Valley lakes, at minimum cost, a punt costing Br450 with a life of 3 to 5 years while a raft costs about Br30 and lasts for 3months.
On Lake Tana, the Ethiopian Orthodox Church/Development and Inter-Church Aid Department (EOC/DICAD) project has introduced five GRP and 25metal boats with outboard and inboard motors. All the motorized boats have been provided to fishermen almost free of charge. The technology allows fishermen to operate on the entire surface of the lake, but producers can not afford its high running costs when compared with economic conditions.
Gillnets are by far the most popular gear used, with the largest mesh sizes on Lakes Abaya and Chamo (up to 32 cm), where fish is bigger. Gillnets are mostly operated with rafts on the exception of Lake Awassa where fishermen use wooden rowing boats. Beach seines of about 150-200 m long are used on Lakes Langano and Ziway (in Ziway during fasting periods only). The cost of one 150m beach seine in Ziway is about Br2,800. Taking into account its relatively high cost a large number of fishermen is engaged as crew members. Castnets are also used by traditional fishermen on Lake Tana, while hook and lines and long lines are operated for catching Nile perch on Lake Chamo.
In the near future, the LFDP (Phase 2) is expected to conduct exploratory commercial fishing operations with a view to identifying improved vessels and gear.
Some repair and maintenance facilities have been provided on Lake Tana by the EOC/DICAD project which has organised a net manufacturing unit with trained women. In the Rift Valley, the LFDP (Phase2) operates a boat-building yard at Ziway and is also expected to construct workshops and net-making/repair facilities.
Apart from Lakes Ziway, Abaya, and Tana/Bahir dahr where the FPMC hold basic jetties, there is a general lack of landing facilities on Ethiopian fisheries. Only two landing points, under the control of the FPMC, are equipped with electricity and fresh water supplies for fish handling and preservation. The main installations are at Ziway (chill store, ice) and Arba Minch (freezing, cold store), with more limited facilities at Bahir Dar (cold store).
In the near future, it is foreseen that the LFDP (Phase 2) will construct jetties in Ziway, Abaya, Chamo, Tana/Gorgora and Tana/Bahir Dar, as well as fish cleaning and market shed at Gorgora, Bahir Dahr, Ziway and Awassa.
The fishery sector employs about 2 250 persons in the primary sector, including registered and "informal". Furthermore, about 46 000immigrants would fish daily on River Baro for their subsistence (FRDD).
Until recently, the majority of fishermen used to be organised into fishermen's association (Service Cooperative), in line with the previous policy of the Government. The Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) has granted commercial fishing rights only to fishermen's associations, each of which has to pay a royalty in return for the privilege of exploiting a given water body.
Of the 16 fishermen's associations formed (13 on lakes/reservoirs and 3 on river) and the 30 units (informal associations), none of them have ever achieved the legal status of cooperative. Associations have essentially limited their role in the distribution of subsidized gear as well as in tax collection from members (registration fee, annual subscription, ad valorem charge on sales of fish). Under the new economic policy, a new status for cooperatives is being drafted through the Cooperative Promotion and Agricultural Development Department (CPAD) of the MOA. This might allow members to acquire required capital and to refund profits, as in any private firm.
In addition to registered producers, an increasing number of informal fishermen tends to join the fisheries sector, mostly on a part-time basis. These fishermen are not organised at all, although some of them have been supplied with gear through NGOs.
Large differences in costs and earnings of fishermen exist between the various water bodies, according to the availability of marketing outlets. In 1990, the annual net income per fisherman was calculated from Br2 800 at Arba Minch (Lake Chamo) to Br800 on Lake Ziway (FAO, 1990). According to the same survey, the average net benefit per member of fishermen's associations provided his family with grossly the national average income. Furthermore, fishermen generally find time to farm and breed animals at a subsistence level.
The purchasing power of fishermen has globally decreased over the last decade, with producer's prices fixed by the FPMC remaining unchanged until 1992, while inflation was about 5% per annum. Of particular interest to fishermen was the price of their inputs, which increased at an annual rate of 19% from 1980 to 1990. It therefore became more difficult for fishermen to purchase twine than beef or basic cereal commodity (e.g. the teff rose at an annual average of 10%). This trend was of particular significance in production areas where the FPMC was the only buyer. For example, an informal fisherman selling tilapia ten years ago for 45 cents/kg and now selling at Br1.20/kg would have maintained an average price increase of 10% per annum.
The situation is now improving as a result of an increase in FPMC purchasing price since 1992 of about 50% for the major commercial species.
2.1.4 Fish Processing and Marketing
Although Ethiopian consumers have preference to whole fresh fish, traditional drying of fish is performed on remote fishing sites. Smoking is not a traditional method and only some trials have been carried out at the FPMC receiving station at Ziway, for the expatriate market.
Dried fish, known as "kuanta", is mostly produced in the Arba Minch area. Fish is filleted, cut into large strips and hung up to dry on strings for two to three days. Kuanta is packed into sacks for storage on the ground for several weeks if necessary. Provided storage in this way does not exceed a month, spoilage is only slight. Although there is no similar long tradition in eating kuanta further north, seasonal processing during fasting periods do exist in Lake Ziway area.
Over the last three years, dried fish has been made more and more available in big consumption centres. This would tend to show that although fresh fish is more lucrative for producers, drying has become a method frequently used to preserve excess catches.
Apart from traditional methods of processing occurring on the Rift Valley lakes, canning has recently started with Ethiopian Meat Concentrates, a small subsidiary of the State-run Ethiopian Meat Corporation (EMC). Trials began in 1989 in collaboration with the FPMC and the Ethiopian Nutritional Institute (ENI). By late November 1990, about 10 000cans of fish with beans were produced. The factory's maximum capacity was 50 000cans/day with single shift working, or 100 000 cans/day for two shifts. At present, as a result of the increase in the prices of fresh fish, canning industry is attempting to process low valued fish like catfish to be profitable.
Concerning fresh fish handling and distribution, most of private traders do not use even basic cold chains because of the lack of ice and insulated containers. Fish is distributed without any particular processing, except in Bahir Dahr area on Lake Tana. As a result, storage of fresh fish can not exceed two days leading traders to concentrate their activity during fasting periods, when the demand is active. This situation is likely to hamper the development of a steady fish market throughout the country.
The FPMC purchased fish only from fishermen's associations, collected by boat or truck as appropriate. Fish from the northern Rift Valley is processed before transportation to Addis Ababa. It is gutted and chilled at the Ziway receiving station, while at Arba Minch, fish is filleted at the lake side by fishermen and frozen at the receiving station. At Bahir Dar, fish is filleted at the station before storage in a cold room.
At the FPMC headquarters in Addis Ababa, further processing may be carried out. About 40% of fish collected is processed in order to build up stocks of frozen fillets. Nile perch fillets from Arba Minch are sold almost as soon as they arrive with no further processing. Other fish is distributed to the FPMC's 13 retail shops in the capital. During filleting, about 30% of the fish was discarded in 1990, representing at least 300t of physical losses and inducing rather high costs.
Post-harvest losses for fresh fish handling are negligible during fasting periods due to the rapidity of transactions which rarely exceed 24 hours. Out of fasting periods, fishers and retailers are often faced with problems of storage because of the lack of basic cold chain with ice. Kuanta may present physical losses since it is mostly prepared in poor hygienic standards, insufficiently dried and stored directly on the ground leading to significant depreciation in quality.
The Ethiopian Authority for Standardisation (EAS) has drawn up standards associated with fisheries in consultation with the FRDD and with reference to standards already set by the Codex Alimentarius. Ethiopian Standards include among others: codes of practice for handling fish on shore, on board and in transport; codes of practice for handling fillets; hygienic requirements for fish processing and canning factories; and specifications for fish quality at retail level.
The FPMC has dominated fish marketing over the last 15 years, benefitting from a monopolistic situation in the post-harvest sector and fixed price policy. However, in practice FPMC's intended monopoly materialised mainly in Addis Ababa, with fish coming from Ziway, Langano, Arba Minch and to a less extent from Bahir Dahr. The private traders, which now handle about half total fish harvest, have developed rapidly, although their status is still not legally recognized.
The FPMC was established as a semi-autonomous body in 1978 by the MOA, with the main objective of setting up a marketing network between production centres and urban consumption areas. In 1989 the FPMC obtained a legal status through the "FPMC Establishment Council of State Special Decree 13/1989". From its inception, the FPMC has tried to supply Addis Ababa with fish from the Rift Valley lakes, with financial support from the Agricultural and Industrial Development Bank (AIDB), and subsequently from the LFDP (Phase1) started in 1981.
The FPMC's domestic marketing policy was to satisfy the bulk of the fish demand during the fasting periods by filling the central cold store at Addis Ababa so that the stock constituted can be released for supplying consumers. For months before fasting begins, the FPMC gave priority to filleting Tilapia, in spite of the consumers' preference for whole fresh products. Despite bad financial performance over the last decade, the FPMC remained in business with the help of additional funds regularly transferred from the MOA. The FPMC had however contributed greatly to the propagation of fish consumption to the Highlands.
According to the new economic policy the Corporation is expected to operate in a competitive environment with private traders, as a pure commercially-oriented company. Since March 1992, the FPMC has obtained a tacit semi-autonomous status under the MOA, and procedures for changing pricing policy have became much more flexible than before. Furthermore, at the beginning of 1993, the FPMC has received credit under the LFDP (Phase2) for spare parts, trucks and 4WD vehicles. The FPMC has also given thought to rationalising its activities to improve profitability. In view of this, some of its retail shops may be sold off to private traders.
Private traders presently handle about 3 000t of fish, i.e. more than 50 percent of the total fish production, through informal marketing channels.
In production areas, free-auctioned markets have developed, due to a very strong local demand resulting from the availability of fish on the market places. The fixed low prices paid by the FPMC also have encouraged the development of a thriving parallel market. In general it can be argued that where fishermen were not depending on the FPMC outlets, a more lucrative local market had developed, as shown by the producer prices given in table 3. In the near future, the LFDP (Phase2) is expected to support the construction of improved fish market places at Arba Minch and Gonder, to be managed by the municipalities.
Private traders to the Highlands are now allowed to carry on fish business activity all the year long, whereas in the recent past they were tolerated during fasting periods only. At Addis Ababa, 15 traders have recently obtained a licence under the FRDD, according to criteria of sufficient handling and cold storing capacities. They purchase fish either directly from Lakes Koka and Ziway, or from the central FPMC station. Some of them use their own car or open truck to transport fish, while others are organized during fasting periods to jointly rent an open truck.
Table3: Fish Prices Ex-Vessel in Br/Kg
FPMC fresh (1990)
FPMC fresh (1993)
Informal fresh (1990)
Informal dried^a/ (1990)
Abaya-Chamo
Tilapia
Nile perch fil.
Other fillets
na
na
na
na
Awassa
Tilapia
na
na
Langano
Tilapia
na
Ziway
Tilapia
Koka
Tilapia
Tana
Tilapia
Catfish
na
na
na
^a/ Fresh equivalent weight
Source: FRDD, FPMC, FAO (1990)
Regarding the access to landing points, systems of collecting boats are sometimes operated by the FPMC (islands on Lake Ziway and fishermen's camps around Lake Chamo). The other water bodies have at least one basic access point by road to the shore, although more feeder roads are needed for further fisheries development. Road networks from fishing towns/villages to main consumption centres are in rather good conditions, with the exception of Arba Minch during the rainy season, and to a less extent Gonder in the north of Lake Tana. Nevertheless, despite the recent abolishment of the curfew, roads at night are not considered safe for the time being.
2.1.5 Fish Consumption and demand
Historically, Ethiopians are meat eaters, with an average annual meat consumption of about 10kg per caput. This is due to cultural patterns and, to a significant extent, to fertile central highlands which allowed considerable expansion of cattle breeding. In addition, the dominant Ethiopian Orthodox Church which encourages the eating of fish during fasting seasons, has served to concentrate domestic fish demand within two short periods of the year totalizing about 80 days: two months between February and April and two weeks in August.
The estimated average national per caput consumption, in spite of an increase by 20% for the last 4 years, is still the lowest in Africa. It is currently estimated at 0.107kg/year. The most popular species is tilapia due to its predominance in the catch and its relatively low price when compared to meat prices, while dried fish would now benefit from a growing demand in the Highlands, as a result of its deflated price.
However, extreme regional variations in fish consumption suggest that the seasonal peaks and troughs in demand, ascribed to the fasting habit only, have to be reconsidered.
At Addis Ababa, the estimated per caput consumption of fish provided by the FPMC only was about 0.81kg in 1989/90. Extra fish from Langano, Ziway and Koka sold by private traders could easily add ten per cent to the consumption attributable to the FPMC. The total per caput consumption of fresh fish at Addis Ababa is therefore about 0.9kg/year, or about ten times the national average.
In production areas (Arba Minch and Sodo areas, as well as at Awassa), local per caput fish consumption is estimated at 8.5kg/year, or about one hundred times the national average (FAO, 1990). More recently, the FRDD placed the fish consumption in Gambella, close to River Baro, at about 10kg/year.
In production areas, fish demand has been stimulated by regular supply of good quality product at an acceptable price, when compared to the prices of meat. In 1986, a market survey conducted at Addis Ababa already underlined this tendency in fish demand (Tiffney, 1986). Consumers interviewed in retail fish shops said they would eat more fish if supplies were more regular throughout the year (58%), if fish shops were located closer to their homes (43%), and if fish prices were lower (38%).
In the recent past, meat and fish prices were strongly regulated by the Government, with a view to facilitating consumption of animal proteins in big towns. At that time, differences in the prices were not so much and consumers were not encouraged to buy fish out of fasting. In the course of the changes in economic policy, beef prices increased by 80% between 1987 and 1990, and by 70% between 1990 and 1993, while fish prices in FPMC shops increased only by 30% in 1992. In june 1993, meat price was about 15 Br/Kg, against a fish price of about 5 Br/Kg for the bulk of the production (gutted tilapia: 3.20Br/Kg; filleted Nile perch: 9.50 Br/Kg; others fillets: 5.35 Br/Kg).
The repeated changes in the prices of animal products have had a significant impact on Ethiopians' food habits, who are now encouraged to substitute more meat for fish. For instance, fish has become more and more available in most of the private restaurants and hotels of the capital.
Under the new economic environment, the fishery sector is now benefitting from an active fish demand, in particular in big consumption centres. A conservative figure of fish demand for the year 2000 can be placed at about 10 000t/year, corresponding to doubling the present fish production, or about a third of the estimated fish potential. However, it is likely that the lack of tradition in marketing fresh fish with ice and insulated containers will have to be removed to reach this objective.
2.2 Aquaculture
Aquaculture is still virtually non-existent in Ethiopia, despite favourable physical conditions.
The high central Plateau above 2 500 m (11% of total area) could be appropriate for all year round farming of cold water species. The surrounding and central Highlands present temperature characteristics favourable to the breeding of a large number of species, from cold water to warm water fish. In addition, the temperature conditions are remarkably stable as compared to European so-called "temperate climates" and give a great scope for cultivating a large range of species in very good conditions.
The lowlands (33% of total area) offer ideal temperature conditions for warm water species such as tilapine, but are unfortunately water-deficient zones, with a long dry season susceptible to drought. Soils are also generally sandy and not germane for pond construction. Water storage microdams could however be employed for fish breeding.
Among local species found in the country, species known as having a good breeding potential are Oreochromis niloticus, Sarotherodon gallileus, Heterotis niloticus, Clarias lazera and Clarias mossambicus. As from 1936, non-indigenous fish species were also introduced for game fishing, improvement of local stocks and control of weeds and disease vectors. Rainbow trout was introduced in 1973-1974 into the rivers Sibilo, Chacha, Beressa and Mugar and into the lake Wonchi, while common carp (Cyprinus carpio), crucian carp (Carassius carassius) and Tilapia zillii have been introduced into lakes for stock improvement.
The management of trout populations, whenever included in the national parks, falls however under the responsibility of the Ethiopian Wildlife Conservation Organisation (EWCO).
Apart from a few small fish ponds, the only aquaculture activities are mainly the culture-based stock enhancement operations carried out by the Sebeta Fish Culture Station (SFCS) of the FRDD. The station, built in 1975, has a research, training and extension vocation. The SFCS has a total area of 2 ha and consists of building (offices, laboratory, hatchery and stores) and outdoor ponds made of 18 units. The theoretical production capacity of the hatchery could reach up to 2 to 3million fingerlings per year.
The SFCS has maintained and propagated brood stocks of common carp, crucian carp, Tilapia zillii, Oreochromis niloticus (collected from natural water bodies) and goldfish. From the beginning, the station has introduced about one million fingerlings into lakes, reservoirs, dams and ponds. The introductions were made either into newly-created water bodies (reservoirs, dams and ponds) or into natural lakes. During the last two years (1991/92-1992/93), the SFCS introduced about 50 000 fingerlings both from artificial propagation and wild collection, and surveyed about 20 new water bodies.
Since 1975, about 25 small fish ponds were constructed by individuals throughout the country. These ponds, which cover a total area of 11 ha, have been stocked up by the SFCS (about 120 000fingerlings). The Station has also provided free of charge advisory services on the location, size and building procedure for the ponds. Ponds are owned either by NGOs, or by some peasants' associations. They are operated for self-consumption or demonstration purpose only. No commercial-scale fish farming exists.
Furthermore, small crocodile farming activities are carried out at Arba Minch, under the supervision of the EWCO. In the medium term it is planned to produce 4 000skins per year and eventually another 5 000skins per year from a proposed new farm at Debre Zeit.
Aquaculture prospects in Ethiopia are likely to remain very narrow in the short/medium term despite favourable physical environment and availability of agricultural residues which could be used as composting material for fish pond fertilization. The lack of tradition, the competition from capture fisheries and the small purchasing power of local people are the major constraints to the development of fish farming activities. The lack of training and extension support also hampers the development of small-scale commercial aquaculture.
In the near future, a few artisanal units (2t to 100t per year), aimed at quickly providing first-quality fresh fish, could be envisaged in suburban areas, assuming that market and feasibility surveys have demonstrated it profitable. This type of extensive aquaculture, in a country frequently faced with deficit in animal proteins, could be an alternative to capture fishery, in particular during fasting periods. Such development would however require significant technical support in terms of provision of fingerlings, demonstration and extension services.
<section>3</section>
III. FISHERIES ADMINISTRATIONS AND SERVICES
3.1 Fisheries and Aquaculture Administration
The fisheries and aquaculture administration is under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA). Following reorganisation in 1985, the MOA has four main departments, each under the control of a Vice-Minister. The Animal and Fishery Resources (main department) comprise the Fisheries Resource Development Department (FRDD) and the FPMC. The central roles exercised in the Ministry's headquarters are in policy formulation, planning, monitoring/evaluation, coordination and in the performance of regulatory functions, while other MOA bodies have complementary functions towards support to the technical departments, like the Legal Department of MOA.
Poor linkage and coordination between the large departments and the apparent absence of an effective line of communication with the field level, are among the serious problems to be faced by the Ministry. However, as a result of changes in national policy, particularly regarding decentralization, the MOA is currently under a process of restructuration.
In the recent past, a major problem facing the MOA was the cost of the internal troubles in the country, which exceeded half of the national recurrent budget. In 1989/90 MOA received only 66% of its initial total budget allocation of Br283million, with consequent reduction in the financial resources originally allocated to the FRDD.
The FRDD is in principle responsible for the coordination of all activities related to fisheries and aquaculture. In 1993, there were three divisions within the FRDD:
- Fish Resource Utilisation, Conservation and Control Division (extension services to fishermen and consumers to improve fish utilisation; conservation of fish resources; measures to control fishing gear, seasons, areas; fish quality at producer's and consumer's levels);
- Fish Culture and Research Division (production of fingerlings at the Sebeta site for stocking man-made water bodies, together with applied research in national fisheries);
- Fishing Gear Improvement and Development Division (improvement to fishing boats and gear plus practical training in using such equipment; instruction on avoidance of forbidden fishing methods).
In 1989/90, at its Head Office in Addis Ababa and the Sebeta station nearby, the FRDD had a total of 25 persons, of whom 17 were technical staff. Spread throughout the country at the Regional Offices of MOA were 80 more FRDD staff, of whom 74 extension workers. Nevertheless, the degree of decentralization was already such as that time, that FRDD headquarters had little direct control over regional personnel.
When the current decentralization process and related administrative restructuring is achieved, the Regional Offices may have a total autonomy and their own separate budgets. In May 1993, as a start in the restructuring process, only 7 technical officers were apparently left at FRDD headquarters, while 6 were maintained at Sebeta (SFCS), the remainder (about 90) being redistributed among the regions.
Channels of communication, coordinating procedures and functional development activities between the Central, Regional and District set-up are still to be fully devised and materialized.
None of the FRDD staff at central and regional levels has educational background or training in social sciences, and in particular in economics. This is paradoxal considering the strong influence of socio-economic factors on the fishery sector in Ethiopia. Hence, development planning and programming functions, and more generally assessment of fishery development needs and priorities, are mostly performed on an ad hoc basis.
Extension services lack of vehicles to visit fishing sites, while workers are not sufficiently trained in the skills they need. The construction of two demonstration centres at Ziway and Arba Minch has been temporarily abandoned for lack of funds.
The problem of fisheries personnel is exacerbated by the lack of clearly established job descriptions and proper manpower planning, as well as by cumbersome administrative procedures and severe budgetary constraints (Br288 000 in 1989/90, i.e. about 8% of the value of fish landed at producers' prices). As a result, despite its declared functions, the FRDD has had difficulties in performing such routine functions as data collection, project monitoring and evaluation, and extension.
3.2 Other Institutions with Fisheries Related Functions
The Project Coordinating, Monitoring and Evaluation Department (PCMED) of the MOA is a body responsible for the overall monitoring in project formulation and implementation in fishery sector. Project preparation is done either by donors or by the Development Project Studies Authority (DEPSA). From the appraisal stage onwards, the PCMED becomes closely involved, so that it can effectively assume its role of coordinating project implementation.
The PCMED was implementing 35 projects in 1990 involving Br2billion. The present figure is not known. In the case of subsectoral projects, such as the LFDP (Phase 2), day-to-day project implementation is entrusted with the technical department concerned, e.g. the FRDD. Most activities at field level are however handled by the MOA regional structure. In general, the monitoring and evaluation component is not well treated in project preparation, leading to inadequate budgets.
The Cooperative Promotion and Agricultural Development Main Department (CPAD) of the MOA used to award legal status to the cooperatives. Following recent radical changes in the economic policy, the system of cooperatives has collapsed. Of the 3 500 producers' cooperatives existing in 1989, only 170 survived in October 1990, all of which were expected to dissolve after the harvest of December 1990. There is evidently a psychological resistance towards cooperatives, reinforced by an history of maladministration and unwise spending by elected officers. Since October 1991, the CPAD has however attempted to elaborate a draft legislation to provide proper status to cooperatives within a competitive environment.
The Land Use Planning and Regulatory Department of the MOA was created to optimise the use of land (including water bodies) so as to maximise the resulting economic net benefits. Most of the work of the Department has centred around livestock, grazing, wildlife, forestry and recreation, although fisheries should have been included. In the event of a conflict arising over land use, the Department is responsible for conducting a study, using if necessary economists from other departments specialising in the appropriate area.
The Irrigation Development Department of the MOA is responsible for implementing irrigation projects, most of which involve diverting rivers. Another common water control system comprises small earth dams to harness runoff during the rainy season. In the recent past, the FRDD has introduced fish fry into some dams. Among the large potential irrigation schemes, it can be noted that one potential scheme would pump water from Lake Tana.
National parks are under the competence of the Ethiopian Wildlife Conservation Organisation (EWCO), a section within the MOA Natural Resources Main Department. Since 1982, the EWCO is also in charge of the exploitation of the crocodile farm at Arba Minch. National parks in the Rift Valley constrain fishing activities to some extent in four lakes. The Nechisar Park, established for the protection of savannah, borders much of the eastern side of Lake Chamo and a small part of the southern end of Lake Abaya. The bird sanctuary of Shala-Abijata Lakes Park completely surrounds these two lakes, in which fishing is banned altogether.
The EWCO could have a say with regard to the trout-oriented recreational fishing in Bale Mountains, since it has the jurisdiction extended into the entire area. Yet attention should be placed on the possibilities for Ethiopia to create new market outlets through the development of sport fishing.
Any development involving water resources in the country comes within the jurisdiction of the National Water Resources Commission (NWRC). Established in 1981, the Commission is responsible for ensuring that the best uses are made of water resources. To this end a subsidiary body, the Water Resources Development Authority (WRDA), is responsible for water-related projects: design, preparation of tender documents, and supervision of construction.
The WRDA has recently drafted a National Water Code whose provisions include integrated management of water resources. The drafted code sets out rules for water distribution and rights of upstream and downstream users. In this connection, it may impinge on fisheries in that any legal entity wishing to engage in fishing will theoretically require a permit for access to the water body. Anyone proposing to use water (aquaculture, fish processing, etc.) may also require a permit from the WRDA.
The Ethiopian Valleys Development Studies Authority (EVDSA) is a semi-autonomous body outside the control of any single ministry and reporting directly to the Council of Ministers. The EVDSA was established in 1987 to develop the valleys through a sequence of logical planning steps including long-term strategies and programmes for the sustainable exploitation of the natural resources. Since its inception, the EVDSA has been the only Ethiopian body qualified to make integrated studies on the natural resources.
Subject to the availability of adequate funding, the EVDSA's short term objective is to promote an environmental policy taking into consideration soil erosion, deforestation, pollution, poaching of wildlife, drought and sometimes flooding. The Authority has developed in 1992 an integrated master plans for the Rift Valley to promote irrigation while monitoring the conservation of the environment in a cost effective way. So far, no recommendations affecting fisheries has been made in the plan.
Another institution with interest in fisheries is the Ethiopian Nutritional Institute (ENI). The ENI collaborates from time to time with organisations wishing to promote wider use of fish and fish products. For instance, in the recent past, the ENI helped the FRDD in a promotional campaign by devising new fish recipes. The ENI also worked with FPMC and the EMC in studying alternative canned fish recipes for product development.
3.3 Research and Training
The FRDD is entrusted with the coordination of fishery training and applied research. So far, due to the lack of means to do so, only aquaculture through the SFCS has benefitted from significant support.
The Faculty of Science of Addis Ababa University (AAU) has a Department of Biology. It includes the Aquatic Biology Unit. Since its establishment in 1983 the Unit has gradually built a capability for research in aquatic biology, notably in collaboration with the University of Waterloo. The Unit's major work, completed in 1989, has been the Freshwater Fisheries Limnology Project (FFLP), supported by SIDA. Good published information on the limnology, primary and secondary production of Lakes Awasa, Ziway, Langano and Shala are now made available.
Furthermore, the AAU has established informal links with the research project on Lake Tana implemented by EOC/DICAD in collaboration with the Wageningen Agricultural University of the Netherlands. Collaboration has also developed with the ENI on subjects linked with food spoilage and fermentation. More recently a collaborative field expedition with fisheries biologists from East European countries started to study the taxonomy of Lake Chamo and River Baro.
However, despite the Aquatic Biology Unit's accumulated experience, there is no formalized institutional relationship with the FRDD. None of the Unit's graduates has joined the FRDD, nor has any student come from the FRDD.
Complementary to the above, other research activities have been conducted with support from bilateral assistance but without much coordination. GTZ has provided funding to establish a Research Centre at the Water Technology Institute at Arba Minch, which would have included limnology studies in its programme for Lakes Chamo and Abaya. The Centre has been partly constructed but is still not functioning.
As a whole fisheries research activities appear excessively unbalanced, with priority given to fundamental research to the detriment of necessary applied research. Programmes emphasised biological related investigations and to a lesser extent gear selectivity and fish technology, thus neglecting socio-economic and marketing issues. The LFDP (Phase2) is currently conducting a programme of experimental fishing on major water bodies, to undertake stock assessment and to identify improved fishing gear and equipment.
There is no training center in Ethiopia specialised in fishery. Up to 1993, the AAU/Department of Biology has produced four Ph.D. and 15 M.Sc. graduates over the last decade, all of whom are now academic staff in various Ethiopian institutions of higher education. Recently, the Department has started a Ph.D. programme in aquatic biology with the support of Swedish universities, and some students have been sent abroad.
However, past programme for training abroad in fish technology has been rather important, in particular through cooperation with the former USSR (seven year course leading to an MSc degree). There were also agreements with Egypt for one person per year to attend short courses in fish technology. Lately, from 1990 to 1992, there was an arrangement for some FRDD personnel from Regional Administrations to spend seven months in Italy for training in fish technology.
The retraining of FRDD staff has been essentially undertaken through ad hoc workshops (fish handling and processing in 1988, fishery statistics and information systems in 1990 supported by UNDP and FAO) and fellowships abroad. However, training programmes in economics for FRDD staff are still lacking.
Fishermen are trained on the job by FRDD extension workers and expatriates from development projects.
3.4 Credit
In Ethiopia, there are no effective grass roots banking, savings or credit system. This results to a constraining lack of competition in the banking system. The main banks were set up to specialise and dominate in a particular area of business.
The Agricultural and Industrial Development bank (AIDB), which is a public financial agency since 1979, has been until recently the only recognized and specialised bank to support credit in fishery sector. Its business objectives have been oriented to state farms, state industries and cooperatives. In the past, the AIDB had no direct involvement in financing investment in the fisheries sector, although in 1978 it made a loan of Br0.6million to the newly-established FPMC. In 1985 the AIDB attempted to offer credit facilities to the fishery sector in the Rift Valley, but fishermen were not sufficiently organised for the bank to be able to apply for loans.
Early 1992, the AIDB signed an agreement under the LFDP (Phase2) to manage a credit line of about ECU850 000 (about US$1.1million) for the purchase of boats and gear for fishermen, and ECU2.1million (about US$2.6 million) for other economic operators. In 1993, the FPMC received credit for spares, trucks and 4WD vehicles, amounting to approximately ECU420 000 (about US$520 000), with a loan repayment guaranteed by the MOA. Applications have also been received from three private traders. However, although credit line is now functioning, cumbersome procedure does not facilitate rapid credit access.
The AIDB is currently revising the bank's structure along with the credit policy and lending procedures, with the support of international financial institutions. The bank, while normally requiring collateral or guarantee for its loans, would rely primarily upon the financial strength, productivity potential of the project (internal rate of return of 16% minimum), and the capability and reliability of the borrower to secure its financial assistance.
Interest rates now stand at between 11% and 12%, depending upon the duration of repayment period. With official inflation running at approximately 7.3% per year (March 1993), the real interest rates are now coherent, which was not the case for instance in 1990 where interest rates were around 5% only.
Furthermore, the Office for Agricultural Investment (OAI) of the MOA was set up in 1990 to receive and consider applications from intending agricultural and fisheries investors. Successful applicants can obtain Government land on lease, duty-free imports at project start-up and a tax holiday of duration dependent on the amount invested. Before the adoption of a new Investment Code in May 1992 to create a legal environment for private investment, a fisheries investor to qualify for duty-free imports and tax concessions had to invest on a scale not affordable for individual fisheries (400t/year). A new decree on investment was published recently, but no information has been made available.
As no fisheries law has been formulated yet there is no specific criteria on which an investment proposal can be judged. Therefore, problems are likely to be encountered in assessing proposals because of the lack of fisheries rules and regulations to provide a basis for the MOA investment licence appraisal system to be capable of implementation.
The usual method of obtaining foreign exchange to import goods is for an applicant to apply to the Foreign Exchange Department of the National Bank. Imports obtained in this way are always against an irrevocable letter of credit. The only exception to this rule is known as franco valuta importation. The individual or his relative or friend purchases the goods abroad from personal foreign exchange resources, and then imports them, paying duty at a higher rate than normal, plus the usual National Bank commission of 1.5%. As mentioned in section 4.2.3, the rationality of this system remains questionable.
In this context, particularly difficult for private small-scale entrepreneurs, revolving funds from external assistance sources played a major role in the recent past. The LFDP (Phase 1), implemented from 1981 to 1987, included a provision of ECU 47 000 (US$58 000) for use in a revolving fund for importing fishing material, to be sold on credit to fishermen. Loans were free of interest with one year for repayment. This fund was turned over only once during a period of five years.
The EOC/DICAD NGO project at Bahir Dar on Lake Tana also provided many inputs on credit through a revolving fund. However, of the Br128 000 provided to fishermen since 1986, only 9 700 had been repaid by March 1993. Considering that the prices of both boats and gear were already subsidized, this record would show the failure of such a system of credit.
Conditions for long-term maintenance of revolving funds are still inexistent due to the impossibility of converting the money into foreign currency for the purchase of spare parts and replacement of stocks.
<section>4</section>
IV. PLANNING FRAMEWORK AND POLICY TOOLS
4.1 Planning Framework
4.1.1 Macroeconomic Policy
The overall objectives of the Transitional Government are to establish peace and security; encourage growth by replacing the previous centrally planed economy with a market-based economy; and reduce poverty. The new economic policy emphasizes the need to revitalize the economy and create a favourable environment for development by limiting the role of the Government to selected economic services, encouraging private investment, promoting further participation of the private sector in the economy, mobilizing external resources, and pursuing appropriate macroeconomic and sectoral policies.
The devaluation of the Birr in October 1992 was among the first steps of the economic reform. Furthermore, several actions have already been taken by the Government as part of the overall economic adjustment programme. Some examples are the new investment code, the new labor code, the impending liberalization of road freight tariffs, and the banking law (under formulation).
Some fundamental issues, such as land ownership, are expected to be addressed through national referendum after a new constitution is adopted and a National Assembly elected.
The medium-term economic programme 1992/93-1994/95 aims to introduce a market-based economy and encourage labor-intensive investments. It is undertaken along three overlapping phases:
- Economic stabilization (tight fiscal and monetary policies and exchange rate correction);
- Structural reforms (changes in the legal, institutional and regulatory framework, including revision of labor, investment, commercial and tax codes). Among other things, these reforms are expected to put an end to the discrimination against the private sector regarding access to credit, to introduce competition in financial system, to liberalize both pricing and marketing of inputs and products; and to encourage autonomous operation of parastatal enterprises through restructuring and/or privatization;
- International competitiveness (strengthening of structural reforms, in particular regarding the financial sector).
4.1.2 Sectoral Policy and Development Plan
Within the original Ten-Year Perspective Plan 1983/84-1993/94, there was a Sector Plan for Agriculture, which included detailed provisions on cooperatives and support to farmers. Only broad comments were laid down on fisheries (backwardness of technology used by fishermen, inadequate infrastructure, unavailability of detailed studies on potential resources, institutional problems). The Plan also gave unrealistic national production target of fish products.
Under the new economic policy, the principal objectives of agricultural policy are to ensure adequate food security through increased agricultural production, employment and income, especially in food deficit areas, and increase foreign exchange earnings through increased agricultural exports. Although importance of fish as a cheap source of animal protein is increasingly recognized, the fisheries policy however is not mentioned in the medium-term economic programme, as a result of the limited role played by the sector in the national nutrition and economy.
However, a clear fishery sector plan including detailed strategies and action programmes had never been elaborated in Ethiopia.
Although the FRDD is entrusted with fisheries planning activities, there is a lack of specialized planning Section and expertise for economic research and analysis. Development planning and programming which are extremely dependent on external financing, are thus mostly indicative and conducted on an ad hoc basis. Furthermore, Regional Fisheries Officers have not sufficient scope in development project identification, formulation and execution, and more generally in assessing realistic fishery development needs.
In June 1993, a National Seminar on Fishery Policy and Strategy was held at Addis Ababa, with the assistance of an FAO Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP/ETH/1357) project. The objectives of the project were to update the Sector Review prepared in 1990 under FAO/TCP/ETH/0052, and to propose related development strategy and action programme. The basic elements of a strategy were presented and approved in principle by the participants to the national seminar.
The short/medium term objective (1993/94-1995/96) of the proposed strategy is to increase per caput fish consumption through concentrating fishing and marketing development efforts on the under-exploited fisheries. The strategy is elaborated along the following main orientations:
- To strengthen the institutional and legal framework for fisheries management and development by:
. establishing a permanent mechanism for monitoring the status of fish resources and exploitation;
. defining the legal framework for fisheries management and consolidating private sector involvement in fisheries activities;
. developing FRDD development planning and resource management capabilities, and institutional collaborative linkages at central and regional levels.
- To increase fish supply from fishing communities and private post-harvest entrepreneurs by:
. promoting private small-scale fresh and dried fish marketing;
. increasing fish production and fishers productivity through technological standards improvement.
4.2 Policy Instruments
4.2.1. Statistics
Present facilities for gathering essential information on fisheries production are inadequate. Summary statistics are collected at three-month intervals by regional teams of the FRDD for the regular report to Headquarters. These statistics are supplied by fishermen's associations and by the FPMC, i.e. only by organisations officially involved in commercial fishing. The very significant production from informal fishermen is not fully taken into account by the present system since it is arbitrarily estimated at 25% of official harvest only.
During the last three years, despite the observed increase in fish production, official production has stagnated to 4 300 tons/year. In such a context, current data collection system has become virtually inadequate to initiate sound development planning and resource management. Moreover, when decentralization process is implemented, new complex procedures for data collection and dissemination may be introduced through Regional Offices. The present data collection and quality control systems of fisheries statistics require immediate improvement in terms of methodology, auxiliary equipment and staff experience.
Furthermore, as already underlined by a UNDP/FAO Workshop on Fishery Statistics and Information Systems, organised by the FRDD and the UNDP/FAO IFIP project (Addis Ababa, 1990), there is a need to start collecting socio-economic information as part of a fisheries information system.
Since the beginning of 1993, the LFDP (Phase2) has started to conduct baseline surveys on major water bodies. These surveys are based on questionnaire and information including distribution of fishermen, with indications on their ethnic groups and economic activities, distribution of boats and boats ownerships, and fishing gear. These frame surveys would constitute the first step to the establishment of a fisheries information system, even if a strong central direction is also required to coordinate the various fragmentary systems of data collection.
4.2.2 Fisheries Legislation
Ethiopia has no fisheries legislation, with the exception of a decree relevant to the FPMC activities. Most notable is the lack of legal provisions to monitor fishing activities through fisheries regulations and the lack of a clearly designated enforcement agency. However, general principles as well as a set of uncoordinated fishery regulatory practices do exist.
A fisheries legislation for Ethiopia was drafted by FAO in 1983 (Khan, 1983). This document included among others, draft decrees for fisheries management and development; fisheries regulations; and establishment of the FPMC. Unfortunately, this draft which was then thought suitable has never been followed up by the responsible authorities.
In the absence of a fisheries legislation, the authority empowered with the leading institutional responsibility towards sectoral development is not clearly established. The absence of clearly defined line administration, combined with the lack of institutional consultation, leads to frequent overlapping activities between various institutions. The clarification of the fisheries institutional framework in Ethiopia can be seen as a sine qua non condition for effective monitoring of the sector, and rational management of water bodies with regard to environmental protection.
The elaboration and adoption of a fisheries legislation is also needed for fisheries development with regard to the implementation of special decrees on investment, which requires a proper status for potential investors.
4.2.3 Taxation
Under the Economic Reform Programme (ERP) adopted in March 1990 by the former Government, new licensed ventures in fisheries could have benefitted from investment incentives in the form of tax holidays and exemption for import duties. Further official information concerning the present situation is not available.
The special duties payable for franco valuta imports for some fishing inputs are as follows (source: Negarit Gazeta and Ministry of Finance - regulation N° 3/1989): wooden fishing vessels 75%; nets 50%; engines (inboard and outboard) 75%; fishing gear (nets, hooks, twine) 50%. In view of the current shortage of improved fishing inputs and the Government's willingness to increase fish production, the rationale of current import tax on engines and gear on franco valuta basis is questionable.
General taxes which also apply to fisheries are the sales tax of 5% on purchases of fish, and the annual market tax of about Br300 levied from licensed traders in Addis Ababa.
Income tax (e.g. Br0.10/kg of Nile perch fillets, which would be 8.5% ad valorem), are also levied from fishermen's associations but details need to be clarified for all locations.
Concerning income tax regulations, in September 1992, the Council of Representatives approved a draft proclamation on amendments to existing income tax regulations. It stipulated that incomes of up to Br105 should be tax free, and reduced the maximum tax rate from 85% to 50% on incomes of Br2 501 and above.
4.2.4 Management Systems
In the absence of a fisheries legislation in Ethiopia, the present evolved system of fisheries authorization and control is not altogether clear. Management systems have been de facto under the control of local fishermen's associations, the strongest bodies that prevailed, regardless of supposed rules and authority.
The FRDD has tried to maintain an influence on local practices under MOA guidelines, despite the lack of law which would have empowered the Department to make rules. When a fishermen's association insists on beach-seining capable of damaging fish stocks, or when an individual fisherman uses a mesh size probably too small, the FRDD has no explicit legal sanction to prevent them. Each fishermen's association has therefore set regulations governing its particular fishery (gear type, mesh size, seasonal constraints, nursery areas, etc.). However, judging from the reported annual decline in catches from Lake Awassa, the system has not always proved adequate.
The lack of a legal framework for fisheries activities is considered to be a most serious drawback which should be urgently addressed, especially in the transitional context towards liberalized economy. In particular, there is an urgent need to clarify the legal and institutional base for setting up and implementing access conditions to fishing grounds and related regulatory measures.
4.3. Development Projects
In the recent past, few projects had been directly supporting the fishery sector in Ethiopia. At present, the Lake Fisheries Development Project (Phase2), supported by the EEC, is playing a considerable role in fisheries development and management, while the Ethiopian Orthodox Church/Inter Kerk Urk and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have showed an increasing interest in the sector.
The LFDP (Phase1), supported by the EEC (1981-1987), concentrated on the major lakes of the Rift Valley. The main objectives were to increase production on Lakes Ziway and Abaya, to facilitate marketing by strengthening the FPMC, and to study resource potential on Lakes Ziway and Abaya. The total contribution from the EEC was ECU1.74million, of which 76% was spent on equipment, buildings and fishing gear, the remainder on training. Most of the installations constructed under Phase1 became assets of the FPMC. The LFDP (Phase 1) contributed significantly to build basic infrastructure although outcomes did not reach all expectations in terms of fishing techniques improvement and development of a self-sustained fishing activity in the Rift Valley lakes.
The LFDP (Phase 2) was signed in 1989 with a budget of ECU7.5million under the EDF and a matching fund equivalent to ECU4.5million. The long-term objectives of the project are still to encourage a rational exploitation of the fishery resource, and to increase the contribution of the sub-sector towards rural development. However, the short term objectives have been changed to put emphasis on giving direct support to individual fishermen, cooperatives and fish traders, the FPMC being considered as any economic operator in fish marketing.
Actual implementation of the LFDP Phase 2 started mid 1992 with the support of a team comprising a fisheries planner, a biologist and a boat builder/master fisherman. The project area is currently covering Lakes Chamo, Awassa, Ziway, and Tana. The project components are as follows: research (baseline survey, stock assessment, diversification of gear), training (FRDD staff and extension workers), infrastructural development (feeder roads, jetties, fish landing sites, market place), and marketing (market survey, fish promotion).
In 1986, the Ethiopian Orthodox Church/Inter Kerk Urk (EOC/DICAD) has started a fishing project on Lake Tana at Bahir Dar, with the assistance of a similar church organization based at Urk in the Netherlands. The objectives are to enable the MOA to assess fish stocks in Lake Tana; to train fishermen and extension workers; and to improve the diet of the local population. A great portion of the financial support has been brought as donation in kind imported from Holland (URK): motorized boats, twines for netmaking, cooling facilities for storage, etc. URK has also been engaged in organizing training courses in Holland and facilitating contacts with the University of Wageningen for the research studies.
From the beginning, the programme trained: about 60 fishermen in modern fishing technologies with motorized boats (who went on themselves to train 70 fishermen); four mechanics for engine maintenance, women in net-making; and women in filleting and packing fish. After training, separate groups of fishermen have been provided with a motorized boat under a credit scheme, but by March 1993 less than 10% of the funds was revolved. The research programme, which is expected to end in 1996, includes a comprehensive assessment of the fish resources with the final objective of introducing improved fishing technology.
When the project is terminated (end 1993), it is expected that the community will be able to pursue the project activities through a service cooperative, with the support of the MOA for managerial issues. Nevertheless, the capital-intensive strategy adopted by the project is likely to hamper the sustainability of the project.
In 1986 the NGO German Agro Action helped to set up a cooperative at Wawa, at the northern end of Lake Tana. Ten families started fishing, the men using traditional papyrus rafts and local nets, the women selling the fish. With the help of the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission (RRC), the project experimented from 1987 to 1988 with outboard engines. Since the beginning of 1989, the project has imported inflatable boats, but no data is made available on their performance as well as on the present status of the project.
The Family Service Organisation (FSO), an Ethiopian NGO, has implemented since 1990 a development project at Godino near Debre Zeit, whose rural component includes experimental fish ponds. So far, Land and Water Resources (USA) has provided technical support, plus Soviet and US volunteers who worked alongside Ethiopian volunteers to demonstrate bio-intensive food production, by integrating vegetable with fish pond production of tilapia.
Furthermore, the NGO World Vision, in collaboration with the MOA, has recently introduced gillnetting on Lake Abaya, by supplying two organized fishing groups with about 80 nets. So far, World Vision has adopted a "Food for Work" approach to implement its project.
The main projects in pipeline are the following:
. The EOC/DICAD might launch a project in Arba Minch area on the basis of the accumulated experience from Lake Tana project (URK would have already given its agreement to fund the project);
. The FSO is currently preparing two projects: one project with a three-year target aiming to train 425 families around Godino in fish farming before extending the work to the Rift Valley; one project to improve fish production, marketing and distribution in the Rift Valley, and notably in Sodo and Shashamene areas.
<section>5</section>
ANNEX
Documents Consulted
Allix Aquaculture Consultants, 1987. A Programme for Fisheries Development. Report of the Technical Assistance Team on the Inland Fisheries Resource Development Project
Breuil, C., 1990. Fish Handling, Distribution and Marketing in Ethiopia. TCP/ETH/0052. Rome, FAO
Corsi, F., 1990. Fisheries Development in Ethiopia. TCP/ETH/0052. Rome, FAO
Curr, C., 1990. Joint General Assessment Report: Part 1: Sector Review. TCP/ETH/0052. Rome, FAO
EOC/DICAD, 1990. Bilateral Fishery Development Project Memorandum
FAO, 1993. Proceedings of the National Seminar on Fishery Policy and Strategy. TCP/ETH/1357. Rome, FAO
FAO, 1993. Contribution to the Formulation of a Short-Medium Term Plan for the Fisheries Sector - Ethiopia - Part I: Sector Review
FAO, 1993. Contribution to the Formulation of a Short-Medium Term Plan for the Fisheries Sector - Ethiopia - Part II: Proposed Fisheries Development Strategy and Action Programme
Khan, R., 1983. Fisheries Legislation in Ethiopia. FAO Regional Fisheries Law Advisory Programme, Indian Ocean Region
Marvaldi, B.D., 1990. Lake Fisheries Development Project - Preliminary Mission Report (short-term TA). EEC 6100.36.20.032
René, F., 1991. Aquaculture Sector in Ethiopia: Review and Analysis. JEFAD/FMRS/91/20. Addis Ababa, UNECA
Vanden Bossche, J.P. and G.M. Bernacsek, 1991. Source Book for the Inland Fishery Resources of Africa: 3. CIFA Technical Paper No. 18.3. Rome, FAO
World Bank, 1990. Ethiopia's Economy in the 1990s and Framework for Accelerated Growth. Report N° 8062-ET
