<title>The conservation of lands in Asia and the Pacific</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
The lands of Asia and the Pacific are under intense pressure. They include some of the most intensively cultivated land on the planet, and they support some of the highest population densities known. In most of the region, population is expanding fast, and the demands of an increasingly urban and grooving population are removing important areas of agricultural land from production.
Under such pressure, land degradation has become common and is reducing the productivity of which the region is so proud. The current situation is not sustainable and, though strenuous efforts have been made to halt degradation in many countries, they have met with limited success. As a result, the economies of many countries in the region - which depend essentially on their forests, croplands and pastures - have suffered: land degradation is estimated to be costing the countries of the region many tens of billions of dollars a year.
Yet land degradation can be prevented and even reversed. Soil conditions can be improved, and productivity restored. The region's lands could be made to support more people, and to guarantee a secure future for the rural population.
The importance of this issue was highlighted in FAO's 21st Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific, held in New Delhi in 1992. One of the recommendations of this conference was that FAO should continue to provide assistance to member countries in formulating national strategies and policies to arrest land degradation. FAO has followed up this recommendation. One result is the Framework for Action outlined in this publication.
This proposal suggests a new approach designed to capture the interest and imaginations of rural people throughout the region. It has been developed largely as a result of Technical Cooperation between Developing Countries (TCDC) and it is expected that its execution will also depend heavily on TCDC.
The first section outlines the magnitude of the threat. It explains that while most traditional land-use systems did little harm to the environment, few of them have stood up to the pressures of expanding populations and more intensive land use. Past approaches to this problem were based almost exclusively on physical measures, such as creating mechanical barriers to soil movement. They were expensive and provided few short-term benefits to the land users themselves. They attacked the symptoms of the problem, not the causes. As a result, most were poorly maintained, and fell into disrepair.
The approach advocated in the Framework for Action is based on promoting sound land-use management principles which, because they produce increased yields and profits within one or two seasons, encourage widespread participation. Physical conservation measures will still be needed, but greater emphasis will be placed on increasing and maintaining the land's vegetative cover through innovative agronomic and forestry techniques, and introducing sound management practices. This approach protects the land surface from wind and water erosion, and improves soil conditions by increasing fertility, organic matter content and moisture storage capacity. As soils improve, productivity rises, profits increase and the risk of crop failure recedes.
Few farmers have had the time or the means to adapt their methods to today's conditions of land scarcity. Land mismanagement has become widespread. National action is needed to identify its causes and to suggest solutions based on techniques designed both to raise yields and to prevent degradation. National resources - money and manpower - must then be used to encourage the widest possible level of participation in these schemes and to develop conservation institutions, at both government and non-governmental level, to expedite national conservation plans. It is important that the actions of all government agencies involved in conservation are carefully integrated.
Increased research and advanced training are among the many requirements for tackling land degradation. These are often best advanced regionally and there are a number of successful precedents for this.
Finally, a mechanism is described to enable nations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), donors and financing agencies to cooperate in formulating policies and devising programmes that will work efficiently and effectively. Experience has shown that mechanisms which are controlled by governments but which invite widespread participation at a very early stage are the most likely to succeed.
<section>2</section>
The problem of land degradation
PRESSURES ON THE REGION'S AGRICULTURAL LAND ARE LEADING TO EXTENSIVE LAND DEGRADATION. THE CAUSES ARE POVERTY, LAND SHORTAGE AND INCREASING POPULATIONS
In 1992 developing countries in Asia and the Pacific accounted for just less than 54 percent of the world population - nearly 3000 million people. Yet these countries had only 17 percent of the world's land resources.
Even so, countries in Asia and the Pacific are relatively well fed compared, for example, to much of Africa and parts of Central and South America. This is because they have made profitable use of new agricultural technology, such as fertilizers, high-yielding crop varieties, mechanization and irrigation. During the period ]961-85, 93 percent of the region's increase in cereal production was due to increased production inputs. As a result food production has more than kept pace with population increase.
While agricultural productivity has risen dramatically, the cost in land degradation has been high. Large areas of the region's cropland, grassland, woodland and forest are now seriously degraded. Water and wind erosion are the major problems but salinity, sodicity and alkalinity are also widespread; water tables have been over-exploited; soil fertility has been reduced; and where mangrove forest has been cleared for aquaculture or urban expansion, coastal erosion has been a common result. Finally, urban expansion has become a major form of land degradation, removing large areas of the best agricultural land from production.
The effect of these forms of land degradation on cereal production has so far been masked by the increasing levels of agricultural inputs that are used. However, production of other crops, such as pulses, roots and tubers, has now begun to decline. It is no coincidence that these crops arc grown on land with low production potential, where rates of land degradation are highest.
'... it is urgent to arrest land degradations and launch conservation and rehabilitation programmes in the most critically affected and vulnerable areas.'
Agenda 21
Chapter 14, paragraph 44
The Earth Summit
Rio de Janeiro, June 1992
The effects of land degradation
In the Philippines, for example, it is estimated that soil erosion carries away a volume of soil equivalent to one metre deep over 200 000 hectares every year. In India, some 144 million hectares of land are affected by either wind or water erosion. In Pakistan, 8.1 million hectares of land have been lost to wind erosion and 7.4 million hectares to water erosion.
Deforestation is also widespread. During the 1980s, an estimated four million hectares of forest were lost each year in Asia and the Pacific. The destruction of the forests is mainly a result of clearance for agriculture. The search for fuelwood, as well as the growing frequency and severity of forest and bush fires, are also taking their toll. In Nepal, excessive fuelwood harvesting and cutting for fodder have severely degraded forests - some 40 percent of buffalo feed and 25 percent of the feed for cows is traditionally provided by the leaves of trees. In India, which supports 15 percent of the world's cattle and 46 percent of the world's buffalo, upland forests have been severely overgrazed.
Deforestation has led to a severe shortage of fuelwood and building materials in many areas. Crop residues and animal manure, which were previously returned to the soil to add valuable nutrients, are having to he burnt for fuel.
The region's grasslands are also being destroyed - a matter of great economic importance since grazing is the largest land use in Asia. Grasslands are under attack from over-intensive grazing and from the incursion of marginal agriculture which often fails and then leaves a residue of degraded land. In a converse of logic, as grazing areas decrease, livestock numbers often increase. Grazing areas are often located at the source of important catchment areas, influencing downstream agricultural and settlement so the cost of their deterioration is high.
The problem of the 'vanishing grasslands' is particularly serious in countries where grazing lands are used communally, but livestock are private property. It is virtually impossible to stop overgrazing in areas where grazing rights are not defined. No nation in the region has an effective plan of action to meet this challenge.
Land degradation is also altering hydrological conditions Where vegetative cover is removed, the soil surface is exposed to the impact of raindrops which causes a sealing of the soil surface. Less rain then infiltrates the soil. Runoff increases, stream flows fluctuate more than before, flooding becomes more frequent and extensive, and streams and springs become ephemeral. These conditions encourage erosion; as a result, sediment loads in rivers are increasing, dams are filling with silt, hydro-electric schemes are being damaged, navigable waterways are being blocked and water quality is deteriorating. In several parts of India, the potential life of reservoirs has been more than halved by sedimentation rates that are ten times higher shall those assumed by the designers.
The plight of China's loess plateau
The plight of China's loess plateau
China's Loess Plateau - the 600 000 km^2 watershed of the Yellow River in Shaanxi, Shanxi, Gansu, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia-Hui, Qinghai and west Henan - is one of the most severely eroded in the world. Intensive cultivation on steeply sloping hillsides, using outdated techniques, has meant that an estimated 1600 million tonnes of fine yellow silt (after which colour the river is named) are washed away every year. In Mizhi County, more than 60 percent of the area has slopes of more than 20 percent and annual soil losses have reached more than 20 000 tonnes/km^2.
The plateau supports a population of 155 million people who are among the poorest in China, many living in caves dug into gully or terrace walls.
In the Nihegou catchment area in Chunhua County, for example, in 1985 average annual per caput food production was 430 kg and net income was 210 yuan (about US$30).
Yet the Loess Plateau is intrinsically fertile, is easy to till and has enormous agricultural potential. New crops such as tobacco, groundnuts and water melons are being introduced with success, and the planting of apple trees has increased farm income in many areas.
The cost of land degradation
The most authoritative estimates of the extent of land degradation are contained in a report on South Asia prepared by UNDP, UNEP and FAO (Land Degradation in South Asia: its severity, causes and effects upon the people, Rome, FAO, 1994). Water erosion is the most common form of degradation in the area, affecting 25 percent of agricultural land. Wind erosion affects 40 percent of the agricultural land in the dry zone. There is also a widespread decline in soil fertility and extensive waterlogging and salinization in irrigated areas.
This report analyses the effects of various forms of land degradation on the economies of countries in South Asia. It concludes that land degradation is costing countries of the region at least US$10 billion a year, simply in terms of lost agricultural production. This is equivalent to 7 percent of South Asia's agricultural gross domestic product.
The breakdown of traditional solutions
Asian farmers and pastoralists have not always caused such problems. Traditional systems of land use were compatible with the environment - for example shifting cultivation in the humid tropics and nomadic grazing in the semi-arid areas.
Farmers practicing shifting cultivation would clear an area of forest and then cultivate the land for two or three years. When plant nutrients in the soil were depleted, and crop yields had fallen, farmers would move to a new plot, leaving the old one to regenerate under natural vegetation. It could be 20 or more years before the original plot was cultivated again. In the meantime its fertility would have been restored by the bush or forest fallow, and weeds and pests suppressed.
Nomadic pastoralists traditionally moved with herds of animals to different areas of good grazing and water supply as seasons and conditions changed. With low stocking levels they were able to move to new areas before the reserves of any single area were irreversibly depleted and the soil laid bare.
Problems arose when populations started to increase, and the pressure on land resources became more severe. There is no longer enough land to allow long fallow periods; more and larger herds compete for forage; and other traditional systems of land use are being placed under increasing strain.
Farmers have responded by trying to develop new land. As a result, marginal land - steep land, land in areas of uncertain rainfall and land with poor, erodible soils - is being overused. Large areas of forest have been destroyed and much traditional pasture put under the plough.
Shifting cultivation, in its currently common forms, is a major problem in the region where it is practiced by at least 22 million people over an area of some 63 million hectares.
The causes of land degradation
There are six major causes of land degradation in the region: deforestation, shortage of land due to increased populations, poor land use, insecure land tenure, inappropriate land management practices and poverty.
This situation is particularly serious in Asia and the Pacific because most good agricultural land has already been opened up. Indeed, the region as a whole may already have passed the safe limits for agricultural expansion. The region had only about 0.14 hectares of arable and permanently cropped land per head of population in 1990, compared to about 0.4 hectares in the rest of the world. Outside Asia and the Pacific, agricultural expansion has more or less kept pace with population growth since the early 1960s. The fact that it has not kept pace with population growth in Asia and the Pacific is the region's principal cause of land degradation.
In Latin America, for example, land in use per person was 0.44 hectares in 1990, and is expected to decrease to about 0.35 hectares in 2010, with reserves remaining. In South Asia, with virtually no reserves of land with crop production potential, the land in use per person will fall from 0.17 hectares in 1990 to some 0.12 hectares in 2010. The vicious circle produced by limited land and a rising population is described in more detail in the box below. This pressure on the land has three main effects:
o extensive farming systems, which were traditionally in harmony with the environment since only low productivity was demanded of them, have become inappropriate;
o increasing numbers of the rural population are being forced to farm marginal and unsuitable land, which shell becomes quickly degraded; and
o more people move to urban areas, adding to congestion, pollution and often removing yet more prime agricultural land from production.
The vicious cycle of land degradation
Land, population and degradation
The two most important driving forces of land degradation in Asia and the Pacific are limited land resources and population increase. The result is small farms, low production per person and increasing landlessness. A consequence of land shortage is poverty.
Land shortage and poverty, taken together, lead to non-sustainable land management practices, the direct causes of degradation. Poor farmers are led to clear forest, cultivate steep slopes without conservation, overgraze rangelands and make unbalanced fertilizer applications.
Land degradation then leads to reduced productivity: a lower response to the same inputs or, where farmers possess the resources, a need for higher inputs to maintain crop yields and farm incomes. This has the effect of increasing land shortage still further, thus completing the cycle.
Substantial efforts have been made by individual farmers, national governments and international agencies to counteract the cycle of poverty and land degradation by research and development of improved technology. Much success has been achieved, as in the spread of high-yielding crop varieties and use of fertilizers in the 'green revolution'.
This effort may be nullified if it is not accompanied by a reduction in population growth rates. Governments of the region, as well as international agencies, recognize the need to limit increases in population. There is also a growing awareness that population questions cannot be treated in isolation, but must be linked with sustainable land development. As FAO has put it, 'A lack of control over resources; population growth; a lack of alternative avenues of livelihood: and inequity are all contributing to the degradation of the region's resources. In turn, environmental degradation perpetuates poverty, as the poorest attempt to survive on a diminishing resource base'.
<section>3</section>
A framework for action
Improving land use
Involving the people
Developing local and national activities
Strengthening regional activities
Coordinating international action
Many past attempts to prevent land degradation in the region have been unsuccessful. One of the main reasons was that these attempts were centrally organized and produced few short-term benefits for the farmers who had to execute them. The farmers had little motivation for the hard manual work involved in erecting tile mechanical barriers to soil erosion on which these past attempts largely depended. The problems were treated from an engineering perspective, and little attention was given to inept forms of land management and use, of which excessive runoff and soil erosion were only the symptoms.
Fortunately, alternatives to the purely mechanical solutions of the past now exist. These depend primarily on:
o ensuring that land users themselves are involved from the start in analysing their problems and finding solutions for them;
o identifying the causes of land degradation before prescribing solutions for it;
o using techniques that provide economic benefits for land users in the short as well as the long term; and
o promoting land-use systems that provide permanent vegetative cover to protect the soil, increase fertility and optimize water penetration.
The remainder of this publication describes a framework for action, built on these principles, to tackle the problem of land degradation in Asia and the Pacific, including desertification in the region's arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas. The framework is designed to optimize actions at national, regional and international levels.
Action at national level
The prime responsibility for putting the framework into practice rests with national governments. They must spearhead plan formulation, mobilize the people and initiate the programmes and projects that will be needed.
The key action required at the national level is to develop a long-term land conservation plan which will provide the necessary continuity of approach. A long-term land conservation plan is, without question, a government's best investment in land conservation.
These long-term plans need to be fashioned to suit the exact requirements of individual countries. However, they will all be based on three key principles: improving land use, obtaining the participation of the land users and developing the necessary institutional support.
Action at regional level
National action needs to be supported by regional action in specific areas where this is more efficient. Long-term training programmes, information exchange and major research programmes, for example, are often best carried out at the regional level.
Action at international level
Finally, international coordination is needed to ensure that the region's plans to tackle land degradation receive the long-term support that they will require. A scheme for ensuring efficient international coordination is outlined on 'Coordinating international action'.
Improving land use
EVALUATING LAND RESOURCES AND IDENTIFYING THE CAUSES OF LAND MISUSE ARE THE FIRST STEPS TO IMPROVING LAND USE. ONCE THIS HAS BEEN DONE, NEW POLICIES AND IMPROVED TECHNOLOGIES CAN BE INTRODUCED
Land degradation is the direct result of incorrect land use and poor land management. It follows that an analysis of the reasons wily land is incorrectly used or managed is needed if lasting solutions are to be found. Failure to do so will result in the development of programmes which deal with the symptoms of the problem rather than the causes.
The following steps need to be followed to bring about improved land use:
Evaluating land resources
Reliable data on land resources - including soils, climate, vegetation and topography - are needed if sound land-use and conservation policies are to be developed. Some of these data are more widely available than is generally realized. However, the data are usually fragmented, of different scales and reliability, and are stored in different ministries, libraries and universities.
The first major task is to find out what data are available and where they are located. The second is to gather existing data together, arrange them in a usable form, assess their utility and decide what additional data still need to be gathered.
With computers becoming more readily available and easier to use, it is now possible for any country to establish its own Geographic Information System (GIS) for the assembly, storage and processing of natural resources data. With such a system all relevant data can be stored in one place, added to as more and better data become available and quickly processed into usable forms. All countries should consider establishing their own GIS.
Improving land use
Other more traditional systems of gathering, compiling, storing and processing natural resources data should not be overlooked. As a minimum, each country should establish a small office or operations centre which is given responsibility for recording what relevant data are available and where they are located.
When sufficient data have been accumulated, they can be used in land-use planning exercises to identify priority areas for land rehabilitation. These areas can then be examined more intensively and strategies developed to improve land-use patterns.
Identifying causes of land misuse
The most difficult step in the process, but also the most important, is identifying those factors that can be changed by government to reverse the processes that lead to land degradation. Possible causes include growing the wrong crops on the wrong land, insecure land tenure, poor infrastructure, lack of inputs, inappropriate pricing structure for agricultural products, subsidies, incentives, taxes or even out-moded laws or social customs. Problems like these can seldom be overcome simply by introducing a new technology.
It may be difficult for governments to remove or change some of these causes of land misuse, and changes may have to be introduced over a period of time. Even where immediate changes cannot be made to overcome a basic problem, it is important that the reasons for the problem be understood. Failure to do so can result in the waste of time, effort and money.
On the other hand, if governments understand why land is being degraded, it may be possible to introduce gradual and inexpensive changes that will encourage farmers to take up more productive and sustainable forms of land use.
This information can provide the background to the policies and strategies that are required by a government to overcome its land degradation problems. Even if it is not possible to implement them immediately, the information can guide governments away from programmes that will fail because they are aimed at the symptoms of the problems, rather than the causes. In either case the results will be beneficial and the options available will be clarified.
Lessons from northern Thailand
International aid to help develop northern Thailand began in the early 1970s. Initially, the primary concern of aid programmes was to assist in opium eradication and control. Over the years, there has been a progressive change in approach, from crop substitution to integrated development. A concern for environmental aspects has been explicit or implicit ill many of these projects. However, the way this was carried through to activities, and the priority given to conservation, differed greatly. In addition, these projects took a rather restricted approach to resource conservation in the early years. The use of mechanical erosion control structures was universal at this time. Bench terraces, contour banks or contour ditches were the mechanical structures used. In early 1984, one of the internationally-founded projects made the control of soil erosion a priority for developing sustainable farming systems. In late 1985, based on results from its trials, this project started
implementing erosion control measures devoid of physical structures. This marked a major departure from the previous mechanical approach. The objective was not simply soil conservation, but sustainable farming systems. Among the key lessons learned were:
o the importance of having a master plan for watershed development;
o the importance of participation at all levels; and
o the use of vegetative barriers as the most pertinent and cost-effective erosion control measures in the region.
Source: P. M. Hoey, International Aid and Land Protection in Highland Development in Northern Thailand, in 7th ICSO Conference Proceedings.
Implementing the changes
Reforming agricultural policies
Agricultural policies can have a profound effect on land use. Subsidies, incentives and taxes can all have a big effect on what crops are grown where and whether or not the land is well managed. Governments, attempting to achieve self-sufficiency in a food crop, frequently promote policies which result in marginal land being misused. This, in turn, leads to land degradation. On the other hand, the price of food crops is sometimes controlled and kept to such a low level that it becomes pointless for farmers to manage their crops or land well. This also leads to land degradation. All government policies which affect the economics of land use should be carefully reviewed and, where necessary, modified so that they encourage productive and sustainable land use rather than destructive practices.
Developing and promoting new technologies
New technologies can also radically change land use - for better or for worse. Some of the conservation technology introduced in the past proved neither popular nor effective. For example, systems of earth contour banks and artificial waterways have not proved suitable under most conditions in Asia where land is in short supply. Here farmers are not prepared to sacrifice the land that is taken up by the structures. Where farms are small other technologies, such as the use of grass strips planted on the contour, have proved more effective and acceptable to the farmers.
However, experience has shown that no matter how effective a technology may be in controlling land degradation, it is unlikely to be accepted and practiced by farmers unless it also meets some other immediate need such as increasing yields, reducing the risk of crop failure, providing feed for livestock or reducing labour requirements. For this reason systems which combine agroforestry with terracing have proved popular and effective in the Philippines as they have led to higher and more assured crop yields while controlling soil erosion.
Malaysia: leguminous shrubs for erosion control
In most areas of Malaysia it is common to use a mixture of leguminous creepers as cover crops on land that is planted with rubber and oil palms. Erect shrubs can also be useful in erosion control, particularly where creepers might otherwise cause management problems, for instance in the establishment from cuttings of Gliricida as a shade tree for cocoa.
Research with Indifogera hirsuta in Malaysia has shown that, once established, the shrub can provide 70 percent surface cover and can control erosion as effectively as a mixture of grass species. The shrub grows to about 1-metre tall, provides useful mulch material and can re-seed itself.
Research has also shown Desmodium ovalifolium, Stylosanthes gracilis and Clitoria ternatea to provide useful ground cover, though establishment from seed can be slow. Once established, though, the shrubs spread horizontally quite quickly.
Source: Ghulam M. Hashim, Leguminous Shrubs for Erosion Control, in Contour, volume 22. 1990.
Controlling the loss of agricultural land
A major problem in the region is the loss of agricultural land for housing, industry, roads and other nonagricultural purposes. Unfortunately, many of the region's biggest and fastest growing cities are situated beside good agricultural land. As they expand, good quality land is converted, usually permanently, to other uses. To compensate for this, farmers are forced on to poorer land - frequently steeply sloping ground with shallow, poor soils which can quickly erode and lead to flooding, siltation of dams and waterways, and an accompanying cycle of poverty and yet more land degradation.
This problem is now recognized by countries such as Indonesia where a recently drafted National Soils Policy provides for the allocation of land to sustainable uses, either for forestry, agriculture, city expansion or other activities according to an Integrated Land-use Plan. Clearly any national land conservation programme should provide for regulations and zoning so that land-use changes are introduced in an orderly way and a country's best agricultural land is protected.
Providing farm inputs
The best way to protect soil from erosion is through a dense cover of living or dead vegetation. Healthy, densely growing crops not only produce high yields but they also provide good ground cover and protection from erosion. Any conservation programme should therefore promote good crop management.
The remarkable increases in crop production in the region over the past 30 years have been largely due to the widespread use of improved varieties and a large increase in the use of fertilizers. In 1961, fertilizer consumption by developing countries in Asia and the Pacific, in terms of plant nutrients, amounted to about 2 million tonnes or 7 percent of world fertilizer use. By 1992 this had risen to nearly 60 million tonnes - almost half the world total - and was still increasing. During this period fertilizer use increased from less than 10 kg/ha to about 120 kg/ha. However, there are considerable differences within and between countries, and the prevailing imbalanced application of fertilizers suggests that there is still considerable potential to increase yields and ground cover in the region through improved fertilizer use. Whether this will happen depends largely on the provision of supplies and their distribution. This also applies to other farm inputs such as fuel,
improved seeds and credit - without adequate inputs high productivity can neither be attained nor maintained. In this context, there is considerable potential for increasing the use of green manures in order to improve soil fertility and improve levels of organic matter in the soil.
Providing security of land tenure
Farmers who do not have long-term rights to the land they cultivate are seldom, if ever, interested in improving or protecting that land. This applies to millions of farmers in Asia and the Pacific. The largest group of farmers affected in this way are those that practice shifting cultivation - clearing small plots of land and cultivating them until the fertility of the soil decreases, and then moving on to clear and cultivate another plot. A recent estimate shows that there are now approximately 23 million people practicing shifting cultivation in the Asia and Pacific region.
Shifting cultivators are among the poorest population groups in the region and can do little without help to better their lives or farming practices. Many are now illegally farming in forest reserves. Without any rights to the land that they are using, they have no incentive to change or improve their practices.
Special attention must be given to these and other landless farmers if land conservation programmes are to be effective. Landlessness, whatever its cause, is becoming an increasingly common problem in the region Furthermore, a sustained effort is needed to improve the security of tenure of those who do have land. Farmers who have no guarantee that they can stay on the land that they farm rarely take actions that contribute to long-term stability and productivity, such as erosion protection and tree planting. Various possibilities must be explored, including provision for different types of land rights, ranging from full ownership to leases, re-employment in non-farming activities and resettlement.
Diversifying rural employment
The limited land area of Asia and the Pacific cannot continue indefinitely to provide direct employment through farming for more and more people. Other forms of employment ant livelihood must be developed in the rural areas to take the pressure off the land. Land conservation programmes should take this fact into consideration.
There is already a long tradition of small-scale rural and cottage industries in Asia and the Pacific which should be studied and expanded. These include bee keeping, silk production, the gathering and processing of medicinal plants, weaving, carving and pottery. In addition, there are possibilities for developing small-scale agro-industries to process, or partly process, whatever is produced locally. This is being done extensively in China where thousands of small towns and villages now have agro-industries for the production of rattan furniture, paper, fruit juice, leather goods and many other products.
Papua New Guinea: sustainable sweet potato production
Large compost mounds are used for growing sweet potatoes in the West and Southern Highlands of Papua New Guinea, on volcanic soils on slopes up to 10°. Weeds and excess sweet potato vines are placed in a pit and allowed to decompose for up to 10 weeks before they are covered over with soil and new sweet potato vines are planted. This system is considered highly sustainable, with some plots having been used in this way for 50 or more years. The benefits are enhanced soil fertility, retention of soil moisture but with good drainage, and efficient temperature regulation (especially beneficial at higher and cooler altitudes). Trials with mineral fertilizers have shown 110 effect on yields. Trials have also shown that yields are higher from mounds than from ridges which in turn are better than planting on the level.
Sri Lanka: the Kandyan home garden system
Kandyan home gardens are an excellent land-use system practiced on the steeply-sloping land of the wet hill country zone of Sri Lanka. These manmade forest gardens are similar to tropical rain forests. The system provides a healthy ecosystem for humans. flora and fauna. Fruits. spice trees, cocoa, coffee, coconut, timber trees, banana, root crops and fodder are grown on the same piece of land in a way that makes effective use of sunlight and rainfall, and increases soil fertility. A dense living and dead vegetative cover protects the soil from erosion while enriching fertility, promoting water infiltration and creating a healthy environment for soil organisms. Both soil loss and runoff arc minimal. Research has shown that the maximum runoff during the peak of the northeast monsoon in 1980 was only 8 percent and that soil loss was only 0.05 tonnes/ha/year.
The system has been used for centuries and has evolved as an ideal system of land use for steeply-sloping homesteads. The gardens also provide a reasonably high income from spice crops, timber trees and food crops. The system is now being promoted for new settlements in the hill country.
Involving the people
THE BEST PEOPLE TO PLAN AND IMPLEMENT CONSERVATION PROGRAMMES ARE THOSE WHO USE THE LAND - FARMERS, HERDERS AND FOREST DWELLERS. HOW CAN GOVERNMENTS ENCOURAGE THEM TO DO SO?
While the overall responsibility for arresting land degradation lies with governments, experience has shown that land conservation can be achieved over large areas and at a reasonable cost only through the activities of the land users themselves. Land conservation programmes should therefore aim at creating the conditions which will encourage land users, at the level of the farm unit, to adopt land-use systems and management practices that will lead to conservation. This will not be easy unless those involved can see some positive gains in doing so.
Providing short- and long-term benefits
The first requirement is to develop agricultural practices which will simultaneously increase yields, decrease risk or offer some other advantage while, at the same time, controlling land degradation.
Physical methods of soil conservation will always be needed but they can often be complemented by other approaches which involve biological or vegetative methods of control or which depend on changing land-use patterns. Farmers readily accept practices that can be managed within their limited resources of land and labour, and which lead to quick and obvious benefits.
Encouraging participation
This is now being demonstrated in the Philippines where a new productive conservation system has been introduced. This package of technologies - called the Sloping Agricultural Land Technology, or SALT for short - integrates several soil conservation and production measures. Basically, SALT is a method of growing annual and perennial crops in bands four to five metres wide between contour rows of nitrogen-fixing trees and shrubs. It has been found that this system adequately reduces erosion and restores moderately eroded hilly land to profitable farming. The SALT technology is now being taken up and promoted in several countries in the region including Thailand, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Viet Nam, Indonesia and India.
Sloping Agricultural Land Technology in the Philippines
Sloping Agricultural Land Technology in the Philippines
The Sloping Agricultural Land Technology (SALT) is a farming system developed by the Mindanao Baptist Rural Life Centre in the southern Philippines during the 1970s. Basically attuned to the production needs of small-scale hill farmers, this agroforestry technology has gained wide popularity in Asia because it is culturally appropriate, economically sound and is designed to limit soil erosion.
The technology was developed for farmers with few fools, little capital and little training. It is farmer-friendly in that it was developed to meet the specific culture, resources and abilities of local communities.
SALT is basically a method of growing crops (both arable and permanent) between rows of nitrogen-fixing shrubs and trees such as Gliricidia sepium and Leucaena leucocephala (known as ipil-ipil in the Philippines) established four to six metros apart and planted along contour lines. The leucaena is planted in very dense double rows in order to make hedgerows that serve as erosion barriers. When the trees are 1.5-2.0 metres tall they are cut back to about 40 cm and the tops are used as a green manure in the alleys where the crops are growing.
SALT is a diversified farming system. In addition to leucaena, rows of perennial crops such as coffee, bananas and citrus may be grown amongst the maize. The annual crops are rotated: maize is followed by soybeans or groundnuts or mung beans, and then by maize again. Thus a farmer has something to harvest all year round. Contour lines are established with an A-frame which any farmer can learn to make and use. Traditional cropping patterns and farming techniques are also retained.
If farmers move off the land, the leucaena will continue to grow, and will improve and fertilize the area. If the land is later cultivated, the soil will have been enriched and protected from protected from erosion. The large leucaena stems can then be cut and sold for firewood or charcoal (or yam poles).
A standard SALT farm grows about 20 percent leucaena, 25 percent permanent crops and 55 percent annual crops.
Organizing land-user groups
Land conservation works efficiently only where the land users themselves become fully involved in deciding on what is needed and then actively helping in both the planning and the implementation of what is done. A number of techniques have been developed in recent years which can make the participation of land users a practical reality. NGOs have been particularly active in developing and using participatory methods, and their experience and help should be used where possible.
Nowhere have the land users themselves become more involved in land conservation than in Australia. Over the past 200 years, vast areas of Australia have been cleared and converted to new types of land use. The result has been extensive land degradation. Although much good work was done by the state soil conservation services, the government recognized that widespread conservation could be achieved only through the greater involvement of the land users themselves. A new conservation programme was therefore launched in the mid 1980s called Landcare. Under this programme, farmers and other land users have been encouraged to form groups which develop and run their own conservation projects. So successful has this programme been that more than 2000 community groups, involving one-third of all Australian farmers, have been formed in the past five years. These groups are now able to tackle problems that cannot be solved by individuals or within single farm boundaries; new forms of
collective action are emerging, resulting in improvements to the environment and to farm profitability. A mechanism has been introduced so that these Landcare groups can be formally linked to existing institutions and national level policy makers. The principles of Landcare can be applied anywhere.
National programmes should always provide encouragement for land, water and forest user associations. It is not always necessary to form new associations because formal or informal groups - sometimes traditional organizations - often already exist which are willing and able to perform this function, given guidance and help. Particular care must be taken that the interests of women are adequately catered for because in most rural societies the success of conservation programmes depends largely on the support and activities of women (some 40 percent of Asian farmers are women). In Asia and the Pacific, in particular, attention should also be focused on young people: their participation is vital if means are to be found of slowing down migration to urban areas.
India: improving degraded land by watershed restoration
A US$100 million project on integrated watershed management was begun in the hills of northern India in 1989 with the help of a World Bank loan. The project,. which covered Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Harayana, and Jammu and Kashmir, was executed with the help of personnel from the departments of agriculture, horticulture, forestry and animal husbandry, who were placed at the disposal of the project director.
Administrative, financial and technical functions were all vested with the project authority to avoid compartmental or fragmented solutions and to achieve an integrated approach. Funds were earmarked for training and for participatory on-farm research.
Joint management policy
Watershed-based solutions to land degradation involve the simultaneous management of private, common, arable and non-arable land resources. Local communities utilize many different resources but in India forest policy used to be remote from the people who, though they had some rights over government-owned forests, were not involved in their management. Experience at the Central Soil and Water Conservation Research and Training institute (CSWCRTI), in Dehra Dun, has now encouraged about 50 percent of Indian states to declare a joint forest management policy which is community-friendly or participatory.
People's participation
The CSWCRTI began to introduce resource conservation through integrated watershed management, involving a mix of structural and vegetative measures with the help of local communities, in 1978. People's involvement was initially low but this was built up and the projects were ultimately handed over to officially-registered community organizations. Open grazing was eliminated through 'social' fencing and biomass productivity was doubled or even tripled. The organizations operated independently of both government and local authorities, deriving their income from, for example, the sale of grass, harvested water, fuelwood and membership fees. Funds were spent in maintaining project structures, paving village roads, constructing village halls and starting up veterinary hospitals. In some cases, they leased government forest lands to increase their incomes.
Providing technical advice and training
Land users are frequently ready to participate in conservation programmes but lack the essential knowledge and skills. It is therefore necessary to provide practical training if conservation programmes are to succeed. Successful technology diffusion depends on building links between farmers, extension agents, researchers, administrators and policy makers. Again, care must be taken to include women in these interactions because their role in shaping and protecting the environment is crucial.
Any new technology must be appropriate to the conditions of the farmers. For example, in parts of India the use of grass, usually vetiver (Vetiveria zizanioides), planted on the contour, has proved a cheap and attractive alternative to the use of earth contour banks.
Recent case studies of non-government and partnership programmes from the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have shown how a diversity of institutional arrangements and technical innovations have led to substantial benefits for local people. New linkages between NGOs, government agencies and local communities are helping to break down bureaucratic hierarchies, resolve conflicts between communities, recuperate barren lands, double crop yields, increase crop diversity and improve well water availability. They are also improving social cohesion and providing farmers with alternative forms of credit that are managed by local groups. The federation of local groups has done much to ensure that they can influence higher-level institutions and political interests.
The provision of credit and marketing assistance are two important areas where local land user associations can do much to help. In Indonesia, long-term government plans for reforestation and land rehabilitation include the provision of credit to help dryland farmers practice conservation farming. Credit and marketing assistance are also included in plans for diversifying income through activities such as sericulture and honey production.
Publicizing the issues
Land degradation, in its different forms, is now probably the most important environmental problem facing countries of the region. National publicity campaigns are needed if this subject is to receive the attention that it deserves. Programmes should include national publicity campaigns that sensitize the public in general, and the rural population in particular, to the issues of land productivity, water management and soil conservation. The subject should be presented in a positive way so that everyone is made aware not only of the seriousness of the problem, but also that it can be overcome and that everyone has a part to play.
All forms of the media - press, radio and television - should be used. Field days and demonstrations should be organized, conservation included in school curricula, and national personalities and politicians should be asked to help stress the importance and value of the national conservation programme. Maximum use should be made of local NGOs, community groups and organizations, particularly where the use of printed material is constrained by low levels of literacy. This strategy is already being followed in the Philippines where new technologies, such as SALT, are being widely publicized and the President has become actively involved in promoting soil conservation.
Soil conservation in the Cook Islands
When the Cook Islands asked FAO for help in tackling severe land degradation, the Organization provided experts to review the situation. They provided a report. prepared a training, video and demonstrated conservation techniques at the site of a dam under construction. The team found that erosion was widespread in the Cook Islands, and that productivity was being reduced as a result. The worst damage had occurred when acid fernlands were cleared for pineapple production and for urban expansion. The water table was being lowered and harbours were silting up as a result of erosion. The FAO team proposed a series of long-term actions to halt the deterioration.
Nepal: community development
Nepal's Soil Conservation and Watershed Management programme, prepared in 1988, was based on the key principles of sustainability, people's participation, improving productivity and increasing incomes.
People's participation centred on community development and involved creating Community Development and Conservation Committees (CDCCs), comprising 5 to 11 people elected by household heads in each village. The job of these committees is to maintain close contact between local people and development projects. They also, with the help of local extension workers and farmer assistants, form user groups to deal with individual activities. Discussions are held between the project staff, the user group and CDCC members on project budgets, benefits and subsidies, and the user group participates in all project stages including planning, programming, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and maintenance. The group also contributes local materials and unskilled labour.
In the Begnas and Rupa Lake Watershed Project area there are now 100 CDCCs representing more than 3600 households. The CDCCs meet once a month and are financed by membership fees, the project, penalties and fees, and visitor donations. Conservation farming systems arc being adopted in the area, some 2000 hectares of community land have been treated and rehabilitated, and 900 hectares of farmland have been improved.
Source: Rabin Bogati, People's Participation in Watershed Management in Nepal: a case history (1995, UNDP/FAO, RAS/95/063, FARM Programme).
<section>4</section>
Developing local and national activities
THE ROLE GOVERNMENTS IN FUTURE CONSERVATION PROGRAMMES WILL BE TO PROVIDE LAND USERS WITH THE BACK-UP THEY NEED TO PLAN AND IMPLEMENT THEIR OWN LAND-USE PROGRAMMES
The Asia and the Pacific region covers a vast area and a huge range of environmental conditions, cultures, political systems and economies. It is therefore impossible to produce a land and soil conservation and rehabilitation blueprint that can be applied without modification anywhere in the region.
In fact, there are no universal panaceas or readymade solutions that can be applied anywhere without modification. If the problems of land degradation are to be overcome, each country must develop its own conservation and rehabilitation policy, strategy and programmes tailored to its own unique circumstances.
Nevertheless, the general principles for the control of degradation remain the same for all countries and these are outlined in this document. A fundamental requirement is that governments provide the backup services the land users need if they are to contend with degradation problems. These include strengthening and rationalizing relevant government institutions establishing an advisory system as well as attending to the legislation, training and research needs of the conservation effort.
Developing local and national activities
Establishing an advisory committee
Leadership for the development of a national policy, strategy and programme can best be developed by a specially appointed committee or commission. This committee should represent all major interest groups and include senior government officials, representatives from different regions of the country, farmer associations and NGOs. There should be representatives from government units responsible for macro-economics and budget allocation as well as the technical departments such as agriculture, forestry and the environment. This helps to ensure both the amount and continuity of funding needed in the battle again land degradation.
Paddy fields, terraces and forest are the main constituents of this watershed in a densely populated area of Java, Indonesia.
The concept of watershed management
Watershed management was first used to define physical boundaries of water catchments. The objective, sometimes openly stated or sometimes just implied, was to protect a downstream facility 'in the national interest'. Plans to do this were often made with little or no reference to the needs of upstream land users.
Times have changed, and the 'top-down' approach to conservation is today much rarer. Watershed management is now a 'people-friendly' approach aimed at resource conservation, management and sustainable land use. It is useful, for example, in the conservation and rehabilitation of upland areas, island communities with specific degradation problems and parts of landlocked countries. In each case, the objective is to encourage management of a specific area by the people and for the people.
Several countries in the Asia and the Pacific region, notably China, India, Indonesia, Nepal and Sri Lanka, have adopted the concept of watershed management as the fundamental means of tackling land and water conservation. In Indonesia, for example, actions to prevent forest and land degradation are focussed on 39 high priority watershed regions, following a watershed master plan to be carried out over a 25-year period. Integrated Watershed Management Programmes are being developed with participation of all the concerned agencies, and Will be implemented in 12 priority watersheds. The Programme for the Rehabilitation of Degraded Forests and Critical Lands aims to rehabilitate 1.9 million hectares of degraded forests and 4.9 million hectares of degraded land, and to provide sustainable land-use practices, such as sedentary farming, to 500 000 families of shifting cultivators.
Several other countries in the region are implementing management plans for small-scale watershed at the local level with participation by rural people. In many of these areas, small watersheds are the planning and implementation units for a national master plan for watershed development.
The first function of the committee should be to develop policy and strategy, but it should remain in existence to monitor progress, help revise and reformulate policy where necessary and ensure coordination between different government departments, NGOs and farmer associations.
Another important function of such a committee is to ensure that different programmes for the environment such as national environmental action plans, desertification control plans and forestry action plans are coordinated, complementary and do not compete for limited resources and funds. This function is likely to become of growing importance as different organizations launch related, but potentially conflicting, schemes.
Australia has established a Soil Conservation Council to perform this function. This is made up of representatives from the different states and territories of the Commonwealth. This Council has developed a National Soil Conservation Strategy using the principles presented in the FAO World Soil Charter for guidance. In developing this national strategy the Council took into consideration the views of no less than 49 groups and individuals that took the opportunity to express their views.
Strengthening government services
Administratively, land and soil conservation and rehabilitation are handled in different ways in different countries. In some, the major responsibility lies with the Ministry of Agriculture; in others, such as Indonesia, a Ministry of Forestry may be responsible for the implementation of field programmes and in yet others, new Ministries for the Environment are taking a leading role in the development of policy and monitoring of activities. In some larger countries, such as India, the responsibility for field activities is delegated to state or regional administrations with central government taking responsibility for policy and the allocation of funds.
There are advantages and disadvantages in all these arrangements and it is for each government to decide which arrangements best suit its own particular needs. However, it is important that each country has one clearly defined ministry, department or unit with overall responsibility for conservation and with the authority to coordinate.
In nearly all countries, central organizations are backed up by a network of provincial, district and township offices. When plans are made to strengthen government institutions, it is important that these local offices are given particular attention; it is through them that land user association will communicate with local and central government.
Unfortunately, no country in the region has the necessary finances or trained personnel to provide all the services that are needed. Compromise is therefore unavoidable if a realistic programme is to be developed within the limitations of the available resources. Continuity is most important. It is preferable to start with small numbers of staff, limited facilities and a modest budget than to embark upon an over-ambitious programme which cannot be maintained and which may have to be cut back or abandoned in the future.
Extension services should be developed as an instrument for intelligent communication of new practices and technology, and for the formulation of the problems of land users. Researchers should look upon extension agents as active articulators of field problems. The role of policy makers and administrators is to ensure active collaboration between all involved.
Encouraging the activities of NGOs
NGOs have been playing an increasingly important role in land conservation in the region in recent years. Many are very efficient at the grassroots level and can often involve village organizations in a way that is impossible for government organizations. Their effectiveness in small-scale projects is becoming widely recognized and some major donors are now channelling an increasing amount of their funds through NGOs.
In most countries of the region, NGOs provide a largely untapped potential for governments to promote and expand their conservation and rehabilitation programmes - a potential which should not be overlooked in the development of national policies and strategies.
A national soils policy for Indonesia
FAO has been helping Indonesia formulate a national soils policy, as part of the service the Organization provides member countries. Other FAO soils policy studies have already been carried out, with the help of UNEP funds, for the Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda and Jamaica.
Drafting a national soils policy begins with a round table meeting between members of the government requesting the study and representatives from FAO, UNEP and the International Society of Soil Science. FAO then provides soils experts, land-use planners and lawyers to review soils data and existing land-use legislation. The findings are presented as draft policy guidelines. The guidelines for Indonesia were prepared over a two-year period by a team of four national and international consultants. They suggest that an overall land-use plan be drafted.
Soil conservation practices, the study warns, should deal not only with mechanical and vegetative means of abating soil erosion, but should also concentrate strongly on farmers' involvement and poverty alleviation.
The government will need to undertake a number of activities to implement the National Soils Policy, including:
o reviewing the mandates of institutions dealing with soils to avoid duplication of work;
o introducing standardized methods and terms for soil data collection and interpretation;
o developing the national data hank and introducing regular monitoring of land-use changes;
o introducing land evaluation methods for use within the Overall Land-use Plan;
o enacting a soil conservation act and developing technical solutions to soil erosion problems which will increase farm production; and
o introducing a public awareness campaign to stress the importance of good land use.
Creating a legal framework for conservation
In soil conservation the law has far too often been seen only as a means of enforcing unpopular measures such as the protection of forest and grazing areas. These measures, which have often deprived the rural poor of their livelihoods, have become very unpopular with the general public and have almost inevitably failed. This has led many to the unfortunate conclusion that the use of legislation is counterproductive in land conservation and rehabilitation programmes.
In fact, innovative legislation can offer governments an important tool for promoting conservation. Most countries need legislation to make conservation work - to establish the necessary government institutions, to legalize their mandate and to ensure that they receive a regular budget.
A thorough review of all relevant legislation is an essential element of a national conservation strategy. Where necessary, existing legislation should be revised and new legislation introduced. Emphasis should be placed on the introduction of measures which will encourage more productive and sustainable forms of land use, and effective stakeholder participation.
Reviewing the workforce and training
Staff requirements, training and facilities requirements should all be reviewed as an important step in the development of a national programme. In doing this, particular attention should be given to:
o training technicians in how to involve rural communities in planning and managing their own conservation programmes, as well as the latest conservation techniques;
o incorporating conservation as a vital part of all farmer training courses; and
o organizing short seminars for administrators to sensitize them to conservation and the important role that they have in national programmes.
The importance of these needs has already been recognized by the Asia Soil Conservation Network for the Humid Tropics (ASOCON), which has promoted training for conservation staff in the region and is able to provide information on request.
Identifying research needs
As the general approach to land conservation and reclamation changes, there is a need to identify research needs, particularly adaptive research in conservation practices. These must be suited to local conditions, easily integrated into existing farming systems and readily acceptable to the land users because of the tangible benefits that they offer.
Traditional conservation practices often offer a starting point for research as farmers are inclined to accept new ideas which are based on already tried practices. There are many well-known traditional conservation practices in the region, ranging from the use of log contour fences in Papua New Guinea to bench terracing in Java and a variety of agroforestry systems in the Philippines and Sri Lanka. As populations increase and the pressure on the land intensifies, traditional systems need to be adapted to the changing requirements of land users.
Once research priorities have been identified, it is necessary to consider whether the research is best conducted nationally or regionally. As most countries in the region have limited facilities and a shortage of trained research workers, it is often best to ask regional networks, such as ASOCON, to investigate conservation issues that are common to a number of countries.
Developing conservation programmes
Once government policy and strategy have been finalized, programmes need to be developed. These plans should be flexible and designed to be periodically reviewed and updated. Typically, national conservation plans need to be developed at three levels.
1. At the national level, where government policy is combined with physical, social and economic data to produce a general national conservation programme for the next 10 to 20 years. This programme should be published as a formal government document and incorporated in the national development plan where it forms a framework for subsequent legislation, administrative action and budgeting for conservation. Care must be taken at this stage that the plan is complementary to other related national action plans.
2. At the district or province level, more specific and detailed programmes need to be developed, based on the national programme but in the form of rolling multi-year plans which can be reviewed and updated annually. An important aspect of these plans should be the identification of the specific inputs from different government and donor agencies.
3. At the local level, programmes must be tailored to the individual requirements of the community (the village or some lower administrative level) and developed in collaboration with the communities themselves. Members of the ASOCON network have already been involved in developing a methodology and planning system at this level. Once formulated, these local level plans should be referred back to the district level and provision made for technical support and any other inputs that may be needed for their implementation.
Strengthening regional activities
LONG-TERM TRAINING, INFORMATION EXCHANGE AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ARE BEST EXECUTED THROUGH REGIONAL AND SUB-REGIONAL PROGRAMMES
Regional and sub-regional programmes provide opportunities for the transfer of experience between countries in combating land degradation. In the past there has been little regional cooperation on arresting land degradation. Communities in general and policy makers in particular were not aware of the real environmental costs involved. This situation is now changing and environmental awareness is growing in the region - as is evidenced by the establishment of intergovernmental programmes such as the South Asia Cooperative Environment Programme and the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme. NGOs are also active in such initiatives as the Asian Forum of Environmental Journalists and the Association of South Pacific Environmental Institutions. A number of regional and sub-regional TCDC (technical collaboration between developing countries) networks have also been established. Prominent among these is the Asia Soil Conservation Network for the Humid Tropics (ASOCON).
All these organizations have the potential to play an important part in catalysing regional programmes which are needed in the following areas. However, while Asia and the Pacific's commitment to TCDC is very strong, finance is often required in relation to TCDC projects for travel. Too often important TCDC activities are prejudiced by the inability of countries to send national delegates to attend important regional initiatives.
ASOCON
The Asia Soil Conservation Network for the Humid Tropics (ASOCON) was formed with UNDP/FAO support in 1989 but became an independent network in 1993. The network aims to assist its member countries, through a programme of information exchange, regional workshops, expert consultations and learning activities to enhance the skills and expertise of those responsible for the development and dissemination of soil and water conservation practices for small-scale farmers. The ultimate objective is to help small-scale farmers in southeast Asia use the land that is available to them more sustainably and more productively.
ASOCON activities include collecting and disseminating information about soil conservation, documenting successful soil conservation practices, publishing a newsletter, preparing case studies of soil conservation projects, organizing workshops and seminars, launching regional programmes promoting the exchange of research and extension information, and providing advice and training for national programmes.
ASOCON members include China (southeastern provinces), Indonesia, Malaysia (provisionally), Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam. Each member country has a National Network Coordinating Committee, whose function is to assist the National Coordinator in coordinating ASOCON activities within the country. Membership of the Coordinating Committee includes representatives from all the different national agencies involved in soil conservation.
The National Coordinators form the Network Consultative Board which, as both the steering committee and the policy-forming body, determines ASOCON's work programme.
ASOCON, Manggala Wanabakti Block VII Lantai 6, Jalan Gatot Subroto, PO Box 7632 JKB Jakarta 10076, Indonesia
Training in improved land husbandry
The senior staff of many countries have had to be sent outside the region for advanced training in improved land husbandry and conservation technology. This is expensive. It means that far fewer people have been trained than are required. However, a number of institutions within the region can now provide the type of training that is needed. For example, ASOCON has conducted regional learning programmes. The International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) for the Hindu Kush Himalayan region is also involved in capacity building and training. Training in improved water management with farmer participation has been provided with assistance from FAO. In addition, FAO and other international agencies are now providing training at the national level in a number of related subjects such as the use of integrated plant nutrition systems, the management and reclamation of salt-affected land, agro-ecological zoning and land-use planning. Many of these activities
would be more efficient if expanded to regional activities. Experience gained through these activities raises the possibility of developing regional or sub-regional training, utilizing the TCDC approach and 'distance learning' programmes.
Information exchange
Many advantages are to be gained from regular exchanges and dissemination of information and experience among countries in the region. Existing regional TCDC networks which address land degradation issues include the Regional Network of Research and Training Centres on Desertification Control in Asia and the Pacific (DESCONAP, run by ESCAP), the Bio and Organic Fertilizer network, the Problem Soils network, ASOCON, and the Network on Irrigation and Water Management. Most of these networks have reference databases, directories of co-operators, regular newsletters and periodic meetings. Most still depend on FAO for funding and management support. These networks now require more formal recognition and support by participating countries, and their management: should be gradually transferred to centres of excellence in the region.
Research on land degradation
There is an urgent need to develop land, water and forestry management systems that are acceptable to farmers in the region. The research needed to develop such systems, however, is often expensive and time consuming. Much can be gained by pooling research efforts among countries with similar problems. Research results can be shared by establishing simple research networks or by building a research component into existing networks and programmes such as the Asia-Pacific Association of Agricultural Research Institutions.
Several national institutions from countries in the region are currently participating in global FAO research initiatives. These include the study of erosion-induced productivity loss, integrated plant nutrition and sulphur deficiency in soils. initiatives by other international agencies related to land degradation in the region include the Asia and the Pacific Land Networks of the International Board of Soil Research and Management (IBSRAM), with headquarters in Bangkok.
Soil erosion in south and southeast Asia
An Assessment of the State of Human-induced Soil Erosion in South and Southeast Asia (ASSOD) has been carried out by the International Soil Reference and Information Centre (ISRIC) in the Netherlands, FAO's Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, and national institutions in 16 countries in the region. The project was formulated and funded by UNEP and resulted from recommendations made at the Third Meeting of the Asian Network on Problem Soils.
A sequel to the earlier GLASOD project on global assessment, ASSOD places more emphasis on the impact of degradation on productivity, taking into account differing levels of inputs and management. ASSOD's first objective is the preparation of a computerized database on soil degradation at a 1:5 million scale. This database will then be linked to a geographic information system which will enable the data to he output in whatever map form users may require.
ASSOD is specifically designed to increase awareness among policy and decision makers of the importance of soil degradation in the region and to help them establish priorities when formulating action programmes.
Farmer-centred agricultural resource management (FARM)
Governments, UN agencies and NGOs in Asia are cooperating in a regional programme called Farmer-Centred Agricultural Resource Management (FARM), which aims to create partnerships between resource-poor farmers and specialist technicians and scientists.
Launched at a meeting in New Delhi in September 1993, FARM aims at promoting sustainable agricultural and natural resource management in marginal areas, with the active participation of resource-poor farmers and their communities. FAO is executing agency for six of the seven sub-programmes and UNIDO executes the seventh. The US$12 million programme is funded by UNDP.
The programme will launch integrated sustainable agriculture demonstration sites, support networks, train officers and farmers, and support the analysis of sustainable development policy options.
Coordinating international action
WHEN THE DONOR COMMUNITY AND NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS WORK TOGETHER TO FORMULATE POLICY AND ELABORATE PROJECTS, THE RESULT IS AN INTEGRATED PROGRAMME THAT IS LIKELY TO OBTAIN LONG-TERM FINANCING
The challenges to achieving sustainable agriculture and rural development are greater in Asia and the Pacific than in any other region. The problems arise mainly from high population pressure and land scarcity, rural poverty and inadequate sharing of resources combined with the nonparticipation of most of the concerned population in decision-making processes. The result is land degradation at a level which is threatening the resource base on which present and future generations depend for survival.
So extensive is the problem of land degradation in Asia and the Pacific that few countries are in a position to control or prevent it without the support of non-governmental organizations, technical assistance agencies, donor organizations and financing institutions. Fortunately, these bodies are all interested in helping - given the right conditions.
The first of these is that governments must commit themselves to the long-term policies, strategies and programmes that can bring about sustainable forms of land use.
Secondly, governments must meet and confer with donors, NGOs, technical assistance organizations and other concerned agencies at an early stage as they develop their programmes and projects. This is necessary because they want to be consulted during the planning process and to be in a position to see that their resources are put to the best use. By making its ideas and requirements known from the start, a government stands a better chance of obtaining what it really needs - be it equipment, the training of staff, finance or other inputs - over a long period in a systematic and orderly way.
Coordinating international action
For their part, technical assistance agencies and funding institutions welcome the opportunity to help formulate long-term programmes By doing so they can identify where and how their inputs can best be used, and can then select and develop individual projects designed to fit together into an overall programme.
The Framework for Action for the Conservation of Lands in Asia and the Pacific (CLASP) is designed to be adaptable to the political and administrative system of any country in the region. The following steps are envisaged.
First, a government informs FAO that it wishes to join. A technical officer from FAO then visits the country, reviews the position, discusses what must be done and advises on how work should proceed. An advisory or coordinating committee is then formed with the initial task of gathering all relevant, available data. This includes socio-economic data as well as information on the country's land resources and its land degradation problems.
The next step is important. It involves the preparation of an options and issues paper. In summary, this paper brings together information on the extent, severity and rate of progress of land degradation in the country and its socio-economic effects; it looks at what has been and is being done to overcome the problem, and the effectiveness of this work. It shell outlines possible courses of action that the government may want to take and what the national policy and strategy could be. Meetings are then held and the paper is presented to senior government officials and other key people and organizations, including the donor community.
Once agreement has been reached, the paper is finalized and circulated to NGOs, donor and other outside organizations which may be interested in supporting the national programme. A series of formal and informal discussions is then held before a document is finalized which outlines the national policy, strategy and programme for government approval. Once approved this becomes part of the national development plan. Meanwhile further discussions are held with donors and a round-table meeting is held at which donor organizations are invited to pledge support for the various projects and activities which will make up the programme The plan is then implemented. FAO will be available to assist and advise at all stages of the process.
The benefits of joining the international scheme
The potential benefits of developing and implementing a land conservation and rehabilitation policy in this way are great. The scheme allows governments to develop and implement their own policies and programmes tailored to their own unique needs. At the same time, it presents a mechanism through which all donor, financing and technical assistance organizations and NGOs can play an active role throughout the whole process and therefore feel committed to the resulting programme. All those who should be involved in the scheme are fully briefed and are aware of how the policy, programme and projects are developing.
Participating nations stand to reap many benefits. The overall objective, of course, is to prevent or slow down land degradation so that sustainable agriculture becomes a practical possibility. This is achieved because the scheme provides access to:
o improved national and international data on land degradation and its importance;
o improved training;
o a wide range of donor support; and
o the skills, techniques and materials that have been:, successfully used in the fight against land degradation in other countries and other regions.
In the process, many important social and economic goals are likely to become more attainable:
o farming risks are reduced and farm incomes increased; creased;
o food security is improved;
o fuelwood supplies become more copious;
o migration to towns and cities is reduced;
o the quality and quantity of water supplies are improved;
o flooding in valleys and coastal areas is reduced;
o the effective life of irrigated and hydro-electric dams is increased; and
o improvements in the general environment lead to higher living standards.
CLASP is a natural outcome of the growing environmental awareness of the region's leaders over the past ·. decade It will provide the nations of the region with a sound means of investing in the future of their greatest resource: their land. And it will provide the international donor community, with an opportunity to contribute to carefully planned, long-term programmes that will have lasting impact.
'The Conference recommended that FAO should continue to assist member countries in formulating national strategies and policies in developing and applying appropriate technologies for arresting land degradation.'
21st Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific
5-15 February 1992, New Delhi, India
D/V9909E/1/12.95/2000
