<title>FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources. 9 Session. Report. Rome, Italy 3-5 October 1995. (FO:FGR/9/Rep.). Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources, 9th Session, Report</title>
<section>1</section>
Acronyms^1
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (USA)
CIFOR
Centre for International Forestry Research of the CGIAR (Indonesia)
CIRAD-Forêt
Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement (France).
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (Australia)
DFSC
DANIDA Forest Seed Centre (Denmark)
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (Italy)
IPGRI^2
International Plant Genetic Resources Institute of the CGIAR (Italy)
ICRAF
International Centre for Research in Agroforestry of the CGIAR (Kenya)
IUCN
World Conservation Union (Switzerland)
IUFRO
International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (Austria)
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 3-14 June 1992)
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme (USA)
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme (Kenya)
Unesco
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (France)
WCMC
World Conservation Monitoring Centre (U.K.)
WWF
World Wide Fund for Nature (Switzerland)
^1 Location of Headquarters is given in brackets.
^2 Earlier known as International Board for Plant Genetic Resources, IBPGR.
<section>2</section>
Summary of recommendations
The Panel:
· recommended that the distinctive nature of work in the forest genetic resources field, which required specialized technical and scientific knowledge, continue to be reflected in the work programme of FAO; and that the increased demands for support to global action and expansion in scope of activities, be acknowledged and adequately catered for (§3)^3.
3 Paragraph numbers (§-) refer to the main text, in which each recommendation is found in context.
· recommended that FAO continue to provide strong international leadership and a point of reference for the world community in the field of forest genetic resources, in which the competence of the Organization was commonly recognized (§4).
· recommended that the collegial relations, mutual esteem and widespread goodwill which existed at all levels in the generally closely-knit forest genetic resources community, be fostered and drawn upon for the benefit of sustainable forestry development, worldwide (§5).
· recommended that FAO, supported by the global forest genetic resources community, help ensure that technically and scientifically solid information on genetic conservation aspects was made available to fora in which decisions were made on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management and on variables to be assessed in national, regional and global resource surveys (§8).
· recommended that FAO assist countries to develop or further strengthen national strategies and action plans for the conservation, development and sustainable use of forest genetic resources (§10).
· recommended that FAO, in collaboration with its national and international partners, and with the active assistance of members of the present Panel, help raise awareness in member countries of the need to ensure the presence at the Fourth International Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resources of country delegations covering, or aware of, forest genetic resource considerations and priorities, and aware of the contributions that the forestry sector can, and should, make to overall development of nations (§12).
· recommended that, following the Fourth International Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resources, FAO help convene workshops to discuss tropical and sub-tropical forest genetic resources programmes and priorities, on the same lines as those held, or planned to be held, in 1995 for boreal and temperate zones and for European forest genetic resources (§13).
· recommended that support continue to be given, in a balanced manner, to forest genetic resources activities in the humid tropics, the dry tropics and the sub-tropics, and that exchange of information and genetic materials among and between these zones, as applicable, be vigorously promoted (§15).
· recommended that FAO help support networking and twinning among and between developed and developing country institutions, and actively further the sharing and transfer of experiences, technologies and know-how (§16).
· requested that the importance of the role played by international agencies and by mechanisms operating under the auspices of these agencies, such as the FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources, in buffering against negative effects caused by institutional instability or turmoil in individual countries, and in providing an "early warning system" and an element of continuity over time, be fully recognized by decision makers in the international agencies concerned (§§ 17,18).
· recommended, in particular, that the following activities receive continued and increased attention (§20)^4:
4 See main text for specific action recommended under each of these activities [§20 (i)-(v)].
(i) further development and documentation of methodologies and pilot activities in the in situ conservation of forest genetic resources, harmonized with sustainable forest management and wise use of the resources to meet present-day and future needs. Support to studies on ex situ conservation methods, as complements to in situ conservation;
(ii) facilitation of exchange of forest reproductive materials, under mutually agreeable terms, for evaluation and conservation purposes;
(iii) international coordination, and the provision of up-to-date information on the state of forest genetic resources, notably through continued development and regular up-dating of the FAO's Global Information System on Forest Genetic Resources;
(iv) raising of awareness through the dissemination of information by traditional and electronic means, focussed on different levels of readership and a range of target audiences;
(v) collaboration in international efforts to quantify the value of forest genetic resources and of conserving and developing such resources for their sustainable use.
· recommended that FAO continue to coordinate activities within the framework of the "International Neem Network" (§23).
· recommended that FAO take steps to catalyze further action and to coordinate already ongoing work in the conservation and sustainable use of mahogany species, initially focussing attention on species of neotropical genera of the Meliaceae. Activities should, in subsequent phases of the work, be expanded to cover also the Asia-Pacific and the African regions (§24).
<section>3</section>
I. The panel
The FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources was established in accordance with the directives of the Fourteenth Session of the FAO Conference (November 1967), which read as follows:
"244. Forest Tree Genetic Resources. The Conference requested the Director-General to take into account Recommendation N° 62 of document C67/AG/FO/1 in formulating the Programme of Work and Budget 1970-71. It recognized that, as development proceeds in the less as well as in the more advanced areas of the world, the reserves of genetic variation stored in the natural forests have been or are being displaced on an increasing scale. Moreover, efforts to explore and collect forest genetic resources were, on a world scale, inadequate and inadequately concerted.
245. The Conference requested the Director-General to establish a Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources to help plan and coordinate FAO's efforts to explore, utilize and conserve the gene resources of forest trees and, in particular, help prepare a detailed short-term programme and draft long-term programme for FAO's action in this field and to provide information to Member Governments."
The Director-General established the Panel in 1968. A list of current members of the Panel is shown in Appendix 1.
The Panel held its First Session in Rome, Italy in October 1968, its Second in Macon, Georgia (USA) in March 1971, its Third in Rome (Italy) in May 1974, its Fourth in Canberra (Australia) in March 1977, its Fifth in Rome (Italy) in December 1981, its Sixth in Rome (Italy) in December 1985, its Seventh in Rome (Italy) in December 1989 and its Eighth in Rome in June 1993. Reports of these Sessions have been published (FAO, Rome 1969, 1972, 1974, 1977, 1984, 1988, 1990, 1994).
The Ninth Session of the Panel was held at FAO Headquarters, Rome, Italy from 3 to 5 October 1995.
Members attending the Ninth Session of the FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources were:
Mr. S.J. Midgley
(Australia)
Mr. P.Y. Kageyama
(Brazil)
Mr. Wang Houran
(China)
Mr. P. Mesén
(Costa Rica)
Mr. B.A. Ditlevsen
(Denmark) - Vice-Chairman
Mr. V. Koski
(Finland)
Ms. H.I. Joly
(France)
Mr. D.N. Tewari
(India)
Mr. R. Morandini
(Italy)^5
Mr. F. Patiño Valera
(Mexico) - Chairman
Mr. Suree Bhumibhamon
(Thailand)
Mr. R.D. Barnes
(U.K.)
Mr. Gene Namkoong
(Canada/USA)
Mr. D.P. Gwaze
(Zimbabwe).
5 Represented also IUFRO.
Mr. J.G. Lorougnon (Côte d'Ivoire), was unable to attend due to health reasons. The following observers attended the meeting:
Mr. A.S. Ouedraogo
(IPGRI)^6
Mr. J. Turok
(IPGRI)^7
Mr. T. Simons
(ICRAF)
Mr. T. Boyle
(CIFOR)
Mr. N. Jones
(World Bank)
6 Joined, during part of the meeting, by other colleagues from IPGRI.
^7 Coordinator of the European Forest Genetic Resources Network, EUFORGEN.
Ms. Christel Palmberg-Lerche, Chief Forest Resources Development Service (FORM) acted as Secretary of the Panel, assisted by Mr. Oudara Souvannavong, Forestry Officer (Forest Genetic Resources) and Mr. Christian Hansen (Associate Professional Officer, Plantation Forestry and Forest Genetic Resources), FORM. Mr. J.P. Lanly, Director, Forest Resources Division (FORD), and Mr. H. El Lakany, Office of the Director-General, attended parts of the Session, further joined occasionally by colleagues from the Agriculture and Sustainable Development Departments.
The Panel unanimously re-elected Mr. Fernando Patiño Valera of Mexico Chairman, and Dr. Bjerne Ditlevsen of Denmark Vice-Chairman. The Agenda adopted is shown in Appendix 2.
A list of Secretariat Notes discussed by the Panel, is given in Appendix 3. In addition, each Panel member made a brief presentation and submitted information on the region or sub-region covered by him or her. Observers also made brief statements. Such information usefully supplemented the information provided in the Secretariat Notes on the present state of forest genetic resources in the world, programmes, priorities and desirable action.
<section>4</section>
II. Conclusions and recommendations
1. The Panel reviewed global trends in the field of forest genetic resources and the work carried out by FAO since the previous session of the Panel in 1993. The discussions in this regard clearly demonstrated that, in response to increased international concern at policy making, scientific and popular levels, there had been rapid, world-wide expansion in action aimed at defining, measuring, monitoring and conserving biological diversity at the levels of ecosystems, species and intra-specific variation.
2. The Panel noted that the above trends had lead to a substantial, positive increase in both the amount and the scope of on-going forest genetic resources work, worldwide, and that this expansion was closely linked to new dimensions of sustainable development. The Panel also noted the opportunities and possibilities afforded by recent scientific developments in genetics and breeding which, when wisely used, could provide new and powerful tools to help underpin action in the forest genetic resources field.
3. The Panel recommended that the distinctive nature of work in the forest genetic resources field, which required specialized technical and scientific knowledge, continue to be reflected in the work programme of FAO; and that the increased demands for support to global action and expansion in scope, be acknowledged and adequately catered for.
4. In this regard, the Panel recommended that FAO continue to provide strong international leadership and a point of reference for the world community in the field of forest genetic resources, in which the competence of the Organization was commonly recognized. It underlined the importance to further strengthen efforts to provide technically and scientifically sound information and advice to concerned international bodies, national institutes, non-governmental organizations and the private sector, to help catalyze field level action, and to help coordinate activities at national, regional and international levels.
5. The Panel noted with appreciation the continued and growing collaboration in the forest genetic resources field between FAO and relevant Centres of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, CGIAR (notably IPGRI, CIFOR and ICRAF); with organizations such as IUFRO and its Special Programme for Developing Countries; and with a large number of national, regional and sub-regional institutions. It recommended that the collegial relations, mutual esteem and widespread goodwill which existed at all levels in the generally closely-knit forest genetic resources community, be fostered and drawn upon for the benefit of sustainable forestry development, worldwide.
6. The Panel took note of recent developments in related fields of forestry, including the ongoing international efforts to promote sustainable forestry development through the identification of criteria for sustainable forest management, and through the definition of common sustainability indicators for monitoring effects of human intervention or influences on forests and forest ecosystems. The conservation of biological diversity and genetic resources had, systematically, been identified among the common core criteria in such efforts.
7. The Panel, further, noted the calls made in a number of international fora for including information on qualitative variables, such as levels and distribution of biological diversity, in the global forest resources assessments periodically published by FAO.
8. In this regard, the Panel recommended that FAO, supported by the global forest genetic resources community, help ensure that technically and scientifically solid information on genetic conservation aspects was made available to fora in which decisions were made on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management and on variables to be assessed in national, regional and global resource surveys. Such information was a prerequisite for sound decision-making and subsequent constructive action towards the conservation and development of genetic resources within the overall framework of forest management planning and the sustainable use of forest resources.
9. The Panel welcomed the efforts underway to broaden the mandate of the inter-governmental FAO Commission on Plant Genetic Resources to cover also animal and fish genetic resources; and the promotion of appropriate linkages between work of the FAO Commission and the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. It noted with appreciation that plans had been made for a broadened FAO Commission to be served by sectoral, technical and scientific bodies, including one on forest genetic resources.
10. In more general terms, the Panel repeatedly stressed the need to ensure complementarity of forest genetic resources activities with broader frameworks of action, and their incorporation into i.a. national and regional forestry action programmes and forestry and environmental master plans. The Panel recommended that FAO assist countries to develop or further strengthen national strategies and action plans for the conservation, development and sustainable use of forest genetic resources. Such plans should be integrated into overall land use plans, thus ensuring their complementarity with agricultural, forestry and environmental development strategies.
11. In regard to the Fourth International Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resources (Leipzig, Germany 17-23 June 1996), the Panel acknowledged the attempts by FAO, through collaboration with national institutes concerned, to ensure that the distinctive strategies and methodologies used in the conservation and management of forest genetic resources received attention in the preparatory work for the Conference. This included FAO Forestry Department sponsorship which had allowed forestry colleagues to attend the regional and sub-regional plant genetic resources workshops organized in preparation of the Conference; collaboration in the organization of workshops on forest genetic resources for the boreal, temperate North American and European regions, which had provided inputs to the Conference; distribution to all member countries of FAO of a Questionnaire on the State of the World's Forest Genetic Resources; and the development of a global forest genetic resources
information system, which included country-based information received in response to the questionnaire, information extracted from the reports of the regional and sub-regional plant and forest genetic resources workshops, country reports submitted to FAO by member countries in preparation of the Leipzig Conference, and other reliable and objective sources, such as the Report on the 8th Session of the FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources.
12. While recognizing the need to maintain and further strengthen sectoral groups and fora familiar with issues, strategies and threats particular to forest genetic resources, the Panel stressed the need for all concerned to help ensure that due consideration be given also in the Leipzig Plant Genetic Resources Conference to the conservation, development and sustainable utilization of these valuable resources. It recommended that FAO, in collaboration with its national and international partners and with the active assistance of Members of the present Panel, help raise awareness in member countries of the need to ensure the presence at the Leipzig Conference of country delegations covering, or aware of, forest genetic resource considerations and priorities, and aware of the contributions that the forestry sector can, and should, make to overall development of nations.
13. Noting that the Leipzig Conference should be seen as a tool to increase action in the field of plant genetic resources over time rather than an end in itself, the Panel recommended that, following this important event, FAO help convene workshops to discuss tropical and sub-tropical forest genetic resources programmes and priorities, on the same lines as those held, or planned to be held, in 1995 for boreal and temperate zones and for European forest genetic resources.
14. The Panel recognized the compliance of the Secretariat with its earlier recommendations regarding overall focus of forest genetic resources activities and support to national programmes in this regard, as well as general compliance with its calls for increased cooperation with field projects coordinated both by FAO and by other international agencies, bilateral donors and development banks active in this field.
15. The Panel recommended that support continue to be given, in a balanced manner, to forest genetic resources activities in the humid tropics, the dry tropics and the sub-tropics, and that exchange of information and genetic materials among and between these zones, as applicable, be vigorously promoted. The Panel, further, stressed the need to continue to give due attention to areas marginal to plant growth in all ecological regions, with special reference to agricultural wastelands and cold deserts.
16. The Panel recommended that FAO help support networking and twinning among and between developed and developing country institutions, and actively further the sharing and transfer of experiences, technologies and know-how.
17. The Panel noted with concern the institutional turmoil presently evident in many countries, both developing and developed, and drew attention to the dangers of losing institutional memory and continuity of inherently long-term genetic resources programmes, which underpinned overall development of nations. The threats which institutional instability posed to the sustainability of natural resources, was frequently unrecognized or diminished in public and policy debate.
18. In this regard, the Panel noted that international agencies, and mechanisms operating under the auspices of these agencies, such as the FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources, could help buffer against negative effects caused by institutional instability or turmoil in individual countries, and by providing and element of continuity over time. International agencies could also sound "early warning", and thus help confront emergency situations. The Panel requested that the importance of this role be fully recognized by decision makers in international agencies concerned.
19. The Panel passed a number of specific technical and scientific recommendations related to the exploration, collection, testing and evaluation, exchange, conservation in and ex situ, and utilization of forest genetic resources, including breeding and the wise use of biotechnologies as a tool in forest tree improvement. In so doing, the Panel stressed that individual, operational steps in genetic resources strategies are complementary, and are part of a "package" concerned with the overall management and sustainable use of forest genetic resources.
20. The Panel recommended, in particular, that the following activities receive continued and increased attention:
(i) Further development and documentation of methodologies and pilot activities in the in situ conservation of forest genetic resources, harmonized with sustainable forest management and wise use of the resources to meet present-day and future needs. Support to studies on ex situ conservation methods, as complements to in situ conservation. Action related to both in situ and ex situ conservation should be underpinned by special studies related to issues of particular relevance to genetic management, carried out in collaboration with interested national and international partners. These included:
- effects of patterns of land tenure, legislation and governmental incentives in forestry, agriculture and animal husbandry, on the conservation and sustainable use of forest genetic resources;
- effects of landscape fragmentation on forest genetic resources; variables determining or influencing such effects, and ways and means to minimize possible negative influences;
- phenology, breeding systems, flowering and seed production of species representative of varying successional stages, with special reference to tropical and sub-tropical species;
-joint impact of natural environment, human influences and traditional management systems on intra-specific diversity in forestry and agroforestry species;
- development of checklists for "best practice" for the incorporation of genetic conservation aspects into forest management, plantation and tree improvement strategies.
(ii) Facilitation of exchange of forest reproductive materials, under mutually agreeable terms, for evaluation and conservation purposes. The Panel drew special attention to the following needs:
- review, discussion and agreement on mechanisms for the continued access to forest genetic resources for experimental purposes and conservation, on mutually agreeable terms;
- promotion of standards for the certification of forest reproductive materials, including materials moving in international trade and within national borders;
- development of protocols and rules guiding the safe movement of forest tree germplasm from a quarantine and health point of view;
- action to ensure availability of timely information on performance and adaptability to varying environmental conditions, management regimes and end use objectives, of given and already tested species and provenances, and of application of research results into practice;
- action to safeguard naturally occurring populations against loss of identity through genetic pollution by pollen of introduced, hybridizing species and provenances, coupled with action to urgently raise awareness of such little-publicised dangers of irreversible genetic losses, among policy makers and technical staff alike.
(iii) International coordination, and the provision of up-to-date information on the state of forest genetic resources, notably through continued development and regular up-dating of the FAO's Global Information System on Forest Genetic Resources. In this regard, the Panel noted with appreciation the efforts of FAO to develop the system notwithstanding serious resource constraints, and on-going efforts to ensure compatibility and complementarity of the FAO Information System with other, already existing or planned data bases, such as "TREESOURCE" of IPGRI, and data bases on protected areas and endangered species of the WCMC and IUCN.
(iv) Raising of awareness through the dissemination of information by traditional and electronic means, focussed on different levels of readership and a range of target audiences. In this respect, the need was stressed to continue to prepare and widely disseminate well-focussed FAO guides and manuals, and "popular versions" of such documents published in a range of languages. Special mention was made of the FAO annual newsbulletin, "Forest Genetic Resources", which was considered an especially useful vehicle for information exchange, contacts and training.
(v) Collaboration in international efforts to quantify the value of forest genetic resources and of conserving and developing such resources for their sustainable use. A unified system could help underpin efforts to prioritize species and activities at national and international levels. It could, furthermore, contribute to clarifying the rationale for inclusion of species in the priority lists of the present Panel.
21. The Panel up-dated the lists of priority species by region and by operational activity regularly elaborated by it. These lists contain species and relate to activities which the Panel, through contacts and research in the sub-region covered by each Panel member, considered of priority for action, (i) by FAO; and (ii) by other international and/or national organizations and agencies. The lists contain species of socio-economic value, and focus on those species which are of importance to more than one country, thus implying the need for collaboration at regional or international level for their conservation and development. The lists complement, and build upon, national and local lists of priority species; they also complement, and do not aim to replace, sub-sectoral lists and lists of e.g. endangered forest tree species, elaborated by other agencies and organizations.
22. In relation to the elaboration of the above priority lists, the Panel drew special attention to specific, top priority species and genera in which FAO's assistance was requested to help consolidate and link on-going or planned national level activities of importance to a range of countries, and to ensure complementarity of work between individual countries.
23. The Panel acknowledged the catalytic and leadership role of FAO at international level in the coordination of activities being carried out within the framework of the "International Neem Network", which included a number of international agencies and collaborating national institutes in 24 countries in four tropical regions. The Panel recommended that FAO continue to coordinate activities within the framework of the "International Neem Network".
24. The Panel recommended that FAO take steps to catalyze further action and to coordinate already on-going work in the conservation and sustainable use of mahogany species, initially focussing attention on species of neotropical genera of the Meliaceae in Central and South America, Activities should, in subsequent phases of the work, be expanded to cover also the Asia-Pacific and the African regions.
25. The above, strong recommendation, endorsed unanimously by the Panel, was based on the high market value of many species in a number of genera of mahoganies, which provided income and sustenance to local communities and to a large number of tropical nations; the possibility to manage them in natural stands as well as in plantations and in homesteads; and the fact that many genetically differentiated provenances were under threat of genetic depletion or extinction. It was noted that many mahogany species were of interest both in their areas of origin and in other countries and regions. Possibilities existed to intensify breeding and, potentially, to make use of inter-specific hybrids as components of such work. Problems with an insect pest (Hypsipyla) had prompted the initiation of a number of national and regional research projects and programmes, which also would benefit from additional contacts and networking.
26. Additional genera and species identified as priorities for international support and establishment or strengthening of networking action, resources permitting, included:
- Santalum spp., identified by scientists and Forest Services in the South Pacific as being of high economic and cultural value in a number of countries; several species are in danger of extinction;
- Parkia spp., leguminous species of interest to countries in Africa and Asia. Used for human nutrition and for the provision of fodder, frequently planted in farmers' fields and in homesteads. Mature trees provide excellent raw material for veneer. Little information exists of amounts and distribution of genetic diversity. Many populations are under pressure from increasing populations and domestic animals, and from environmental stres such as periodic drought;
- Casuarina spp, with special reference to Casuarina equisetifolia. A species of considerable importance in land stabilization in tropical sandy coastal areas. Amount and distribution of genetic variation and its adaptation to varying environmental conditions, is currently being assessed through a series of international provenance trials (CSIRO/FAO). The future use of the species may, however, be in jeopardy due to attack by fungal pathogens. The full potential of this threat needs to be urgently assessed and confronted.
<section>5</section>
Appendix 1. Membership of the FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources
(Period 1 January 1993-31 December 1995)
Australia
Australie
Mr. S.J. Midgley
Australian Tree Seed Centre
CSIRO Division of Forestry
P.O. Box 4008
Queen Victoria Terrace
Canberra, ACT 2600
Brazil
Brésil
Brasil
Dr. P.Y. Kageyama
Escola Superior de Agricultura
Agricultura "Luiz de Queiroz"
Depto. de Ciencias Florestais
Universidade de Sâo Paulo
Caixa Postal No. 9
Piracicaba SP 13418-900
China
Chine
Mr. Wang Huoran
Research Institute of Forestry
Chinese Academy of Forestry
Wan Shou Shan
Beijing 100091
Costa Rica
Dr. F. Mesén
CATIE
P.O. Box 74
Turrialba 7170
Côte d'Ivoire
Prof. J.G. Lorougnon
Laboratoire de Botanique
Université d'Abidjan
22BP297 Abidjan 22
Denmark
Danemark
Dinamarca
Dr. B.A. Ditlevsen
DANIDA Forest Seed Centre
Krogerupvej 3A
DK-3050 Humlebaek
Finland
Finlande
Finlandia
Dr. V. Koski
Forest Research Institute
Department of Forest Ecology
P.O. Box 18
FIN-01301 Vantaa
France
Francia
Dr. H.I. Joly
CIRAD-Forêt
B.P.: 535.
F-34032 Montpellier Cedex 01
India
Inde
Dr. D.N. Tewari
c/o FAO Representative in India
P.O. Box 3088
New Delhi 110003
Italy
Italie
Italia
Prof. R. Morandini
Istituto Sperimentale per la Selvicoltura
Viale Santa Margherita 80
I-52100 Arezzo
Mexico
Mexique
México
Sr. F. Patiño V.
Centro de Investigación Regional del Sureste
Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Forestales y Agropecuarias (INIFAP)
C.E. Zona Henequenera
Kilómetro 24 Carretera Mérida-Motúl,
Mocochá, Yucatán
C.P. 97454
Thailand
Thailande
Tailandia
Dr. S. Bhumibhamon
Faculty of Forestry
Kasetsart University
Bangkok 10900
United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
Reino Unido
Dr. R. Barnes
Oxford Forestry Institute
South Parks Road
Oxford OX1 3RB
United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Amérique
Estados Unidos de América
/Canada
Dr. Gene Namkoong
Head, Department of Forest Sciences
Faculty of Forestry
University of British Columbia
MacMillan Building
193-2357 Main Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z4
Zimbabwe
Mr. D.P. Gwaze
Forest Research Centre
P.O. Box HG 595
Highlands, Harare
<section>6</section>
Appendix 2. Agenda
1. Opening of the Meeting
2. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairman
3. Adoption of the Agenda
4. Progress since the 8th Session of the Panel (June 1993):
(i) Brief statement by individual members (regional/sub-regional issues);
(ii) FAO Regular Programme;
(iii) FAO Field Programme activities in forest genetic resources;
(iv) 4th Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resources;
(v) Other international initiatives and developments;
(vi) Broadening of the Mandate of the Commission on PGR.
5. Discussion of Priorities for Future Action:
(i) Species priorities;
(ii) Operational priorities.
6. Proposals for FAO Regular Programme Activities:
(i) Short-term;
(ii) Medium and long-term.
7. Miscellaneous and Other Business
8. Next Session of the Panel
9. Closing of the Meeting
<section>7</section>
Appendix 3. List Of Secretariat Notes^8
^8 Copies available, at request, from the Secretariat: Forest Resources Development Service, Forest Resources Division, FAO, Rome (Italy).
AGENDA ITEM
SECR. NOTE N°
TITLE
LANGUAGES
FORGEN/95/Inf. 1
List of Secretariat Notes
E,F,S
FORGEN/95/Inf. 2
List of Documents Sent to Panel Members
E,F,S
FORGEN/95/Inf. 3
List of Documents Distributed at Meeting
E,F,S
FORGEN/95/2A
List of Panel Members
Triling.
FORGEN/95/2B
List of Participants
Triling.
FORGEN/95/1A
Tentative Agenda
E,F,S
FORGEN/95/1B
Tentative Annotated Agenda
E
FORGEN/95/1C
Provisional Timetable
E,F,S
4(i)
4(ii)
FORGEN/95/3
Follow-up to Recommendations of the Eighth Session of the Panel
E,F,S
FORGEN/95/4A
FAO Regular Programme Activities in Forest Genetic Resources 1993-1995
E,F,S
FORGEN/95/4B
Financial Contributions in Forest Genetic Resources: non-staff resources. FAO's Regular Programme (RP) (Sub-programme 2312)
E,F,S
4(iii)
FORGEN/95/5
Activities and Expenditure of FAO Field Programme in Forest Genetic Resources
E*
4(iv)
FORGEN/95/7
Some International Initiatives and Developments since the 8th Session of the FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources
E*
FORGEN/95/8
Broadening the Mandate of the FAO Commission on Plant Genetic Resources
E*
FORGEN/95/6
The Fourth International Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resources and the Incorporation of Forest Genetic Resources Aspects in the Process
E*
Appendices 6 and 7: Forest Genetic Resources Priorities (by region, species and operation): 8th Session of the Panel (for up-dating)
E,F,S
* Summaries available in French and Spanish.
<section>8</section>
Appendix 4. Financial Contributions in Forest Genetic Resources: Non-Staff Resources. FAO's Regular Programme
(SUB-PROGRAMME 2312)^9
^9 FAO's Regular Programme is financed through assessed contributions of its 174 Member Countries, one Associated Member and one Member Organization. These activities are complemented by the Field Programme, financed by extra-budgetary resources provided by a range of donors (see Appendix 5).
The attached tables show FAO Regular Programme (RP) expenditure in the forest genetic resources field in the biennia 1992/93 and 1994/95. Information on RP expenditure up to, and including the biennium 1990/91, was published in Appendix 4 of the Report of the 8th Session of the Panel.
The figures include:
(i) Collaboration with national institutes, through direct financial support to exploration and to seed collection, despatch; in situ and ex situ conservation; and establishment and evaluation of field trials;
(ii) Expenditure for consultancies; or contractual services in support of specific studies related to forest genetic resources;
(iii) Expenditure for the dissemination of information;
(iv) Meeting costs and expenditure related to fellowships.
A summary sheet is also provided, showing sub-totals for the above items.
Extra-budgetary resources, acquired in direct support of FAO Regular Programme activities and administrated directly by the Forest Resources Division, are shown in the tables in brackets. RP funds from other units of FAO, administrated by the Forest Resources Division, are marked **.
The tables thus contain details on expenditures which bear direct relation to the work and the recommendations of the FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources. They do not include staff time and related travel; nor funding related to the FAO Field Programme, administrated by the TCO-5 (the former Forestry Operations Service) and technically backstopped by the technical divisions of the Forestry Department.
RP expenditure for staff time for the biennium 1994/95 included some 60% of one P4 Forestry Officer (presently this post is occupied by Mr. O. Souvannavong), and part-time secretarial assistance (the balance of Mr. Souvannavong's time being spent on backstopping of field programmes); it further included a proportion of the time of Chief FORM (presently, Ms. C. Palmberg-Lerche, D1) who, according to programming, spent an estimated 10-15% of her time on support to RP forest genetic resources activities. A small percentage is spent by the Senior Forestry Officer (Plantations), P5 and the Forestry Officer (Forest Management), P4. In addition, the activities were supported, through Extra Budgetary (Danish) funding, by the services of an Associate Professional Officer (presently C. Pilegaard Hansen, P2).
FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS IN FOREST GENETIC RESOURCES: NON-STAFF RESOURCES. FAO'S REGULAR PROGRAMME (RP). SUB-PROGRAMME 2312 (EXTRA-BUDGETARY RESOURCES ADMINISTERED BY THE SUB-PROGRAMME IN DIRECT SUPPORT OF RP ACTIVITIES SHOWN IN BRACKETS)**
(excludes time and travel of FAO staff; and activities carried out under FAO's field programme)
SUMMARY TABLE
(i) Collaboration with/support to National Institutes: Seed Collection, Exchange; Conservation; Evaluation
(ii) Contracts and Consultancies
(iii) Dissemination of Information
(iv) Meeting Costs, Fellowships
TOTAL EXPENDITURE:
** N.B. Figures thus marked, indicate FAO Regular Programme funding from other sub-programmes and/or Divisions in support of forest genetic resources activities in RP 2312; these amounts are included in Totals of RP expenditure at the bottom of the table.
(i) COLLABORATION WITH NATIONAL INST'S: (S) SEED COLLECTION, EXCHANGE;
(C) IN SITU/EX SITU CONSERVATION;
(E) EVALUATION (DESK STUD., FIELD TRIALS).
Activity
OBSERVATIONS
Australia, CSIRO/DFR
S
Acacia, Casuarina, Eucalyptus
Bangladesh, FRI
S
Int. Neem Network activities
Brazil, Univ. Sta Catarina
C
In situ conservation, Euterpe edulis
Brazil, Univ. São Paulo
C
In situ research, Atlantic Forest
Cameroon, IRA
E
E. urophylla review
China, Chi. Acad. Forestry
E
Populus genetic resources review
Congo, CNRF
E
E. urophylla review
Costa Rica, CATIE
E
E. urophylla review
Côte d'Ivoire, IDEFOR
E
E. urophylla review
DANIDA Forest Seed Centre
S,E
Acacia, Prosopis; lnt. Neem Network activities
France, CIRAD-Forêt
S,E
Int. Neem Network activ.; E. urophylla review
Ghana, FD
S
Int. Neem Network activities
India, ICFRE
S
Int. Neem Network activities
Indonesia, ED
C
Conserv. medicinal forest plants (in/ex situ)
Iraq, FD
E
Populus euphratica review
Laos, FD
C
In situ conservation of local timber species
Lebanon, FD
S
Cedrus libani
Malaysia, FRIM
C
Exploration/conservation, Calamus palustris
Morocco, FD
E
Populus genetic resources review
Myanmar, FRI
S
Int. Neem Network activities
Pakistan, PFI
S
Int. Neem Network activities
Pakistan, PFI
E
Populus euphratica review
Peru, INIA(A)
C
Cedrus, Cedrela, Swietenia; Alnus, Polylepis cons.
Rwanda, FD
C
Pterygota mildbreadii conservation (in/ex situ)
Syria, FD
E
Populus euphratica review
Thailand, FD
S
Int. Neem Network activities
To be ascertained
TBA
8,000 (est)
TBA
TOTAL:
(ii) CONTRACTS AND CONSULTANCIES
OBSERVATIONS
· In situ Conservation
R.H. Kemp, finalization FO. Paper 107
"Conservation of Genetic Resources in Tropical Forest Management: principles and concepts" (avail, in English, French, Spanish)
B. Wilcox, prep. FO. Paper
"Tropical Deforestation and Biological Diversity: assessing the risks" (in preparation)
Wang Shi Ji, within framework Int. Poplar Comm.
"Options for the development of Salicaceae in Sub-Trop. Reg."
A. Padro, within framework of Int. Poplar Comm.
"Options for the development of Salicaceae in Sub-Trop. Reg."
· Ex situ Conservation
B.S.P. Wang et al., finalizat. FO. Paper 113
"Ex. situ Storage of Seeds, Pollen and in vitro Cultures of Perenninal Woody Plant Species" (avail, in English, French)
· Data Bases
CIRAD-Fôret, France- seedbank software
Finalization of development of software for seedbanks (in prep.)
J.R. Katz- database dev. FAO/HQ
Assistance in developm. of database for storage/retrieval of information on the state of the world's forest genetic resources
T. Niemann- database dev. FAO/HQ
Assistance in developm. of database for storage/retrieval of information on the state of the world's forest genetic resources
R. di Chiara- database input FAO/HQ
Assistance in input into database on world's for. genetic res.
· Miscellaneous
Translation support
Forest Genetic Resources [Information], Panel Notes etc.
Contracted staff, temporary support staff
TOTAL:
(contract. 95)
(iii) DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION (direct publication costs)
OBSERVATIONS
Forestry Paper 20/2- French (translation, printing)
"A Guide to Fo. Seed Handling" (avail, in English, French, Spanish)
Forestry Paper 107 - English (printing)
Forestry Paper 107 - French (translation, printing)
Forestry Paper 107 - Spanish (translation, printing)
"Conservation of Genetic Resources in Tropical For. Management: principles and concepts" (available in English, French, Spanish)
Forestry Paper 113 - English, French (printing)
"Ex situ Storage of Seeds, Pollen, in vitro Cultures of Tropical Woody Plant Species" (available in English, French)
Forestry Paper 118 - English (printing) + translation/printing of Executive Summary (French, Spanish)
"Biotechnology in Forest Tree Improvement" (available in English)
Reports on Sessions (printing only)
"Report on FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources", 8th and 9th Session (available in English, French, Spanish)
Two issues per year of for. gen. resources bulletin (printing only)
Forest Genetic Resources Information n°20,21,22 (23- in press) (available in English, French, Spanish)
Fo. Dept Input to FAO Biotechnology Booklet
"Biotechnology in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries" (available in English, French, Spanish)
TOTAL:
N.B. Also programmed 1995: "Tropical Deforestation and Biol. Diversity: assessing the risks" (based on work of B.A. Wilcox)
** N.B. Figures thus marked, indicate FAO Regular Programme funding from other sub-programmes and/or Divisions in support of forest genetic resources activities in RP 2312; these amounts are included in Totals of RP expenditure at the bottom of the table.
^1 Translated and printed against Danish Funds-in-Trust.
^2 Total cost of re-printing $6,800, shared between Forest Resources Division and Publications Division (GIP).
^3 Translated by Forestry-Canada as contribution of Canadian Government.
^4 Funds provided by Fellowships unit (AGO).
(iv) MEETING COSTS, FELLOWSHIPS
(direct costs, excl. contracts, publication costs)
OBSERVATIONS
Eighth, Ninth Session of FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources
Travel of participants paid by FAO. Interpretation provided English/French/Spanish
Regional Workshop on in situ Conservation on Genetic Resources of Woody Species in Arid and Semi-Arid Areas
Organized by Nat. Tree Seed Ctre Burkina Faso (CNRF), with collab. of FAO, IBPGR, USDA/FS, European Union, 29.1-5.2.1994.
André Mayer Fellowship, Biotechnology in Forest Tree Improvement
Part cost only (period of fellowship: 1991/92). Funds from FAO Fellowships Unit (AGO).
TOTAL:
** N.B. Figures thus marked, indicate FAO Regular Programme funding from other sub-programmes and/or Divisions in support of forest genetic resources activities in RP 2312; these amounts are included in Totals of RP expenditure at the bottom of the table.
^1 Funds provided to FAO by the USDA Forest Service "Tropical Forestry Programme".
^2 Funds provided by the Plant Production and Protection Division of FAO (AGP).
<section>9</section>
Appendix 5. Activities and Expenditure Of FAO's Field Programme in Forest Genetic Resources
GENERAL
FAO's works fall into two categories. The Regular Programme (RP) is financed through assessed contributions of FAO's 171 members. It covers the functions of FAO as an international secretariat in forestry, fisheries and agriculture, as a forum for discussion among nations and a source of technical, legal and policy level expertise in these fields (see Appendix 4). Through its Field Programme, FAO provides assistance to governments and helps them in the development and implementation of national and regional strategies aimed at sustainable rural development.
The field programme is based on requests for technical assistance from member countries. The basic principle of FAO's technical development assistance is to support national institutions and to help build national and local capacities in the areas covered by the project. The five main objectives for the FAO Forestry Department apply equally to work at FAO's regular programme and to the forestry field programme. According to the Medium-Term Plan of FAO 1992-1997 they are as follows:
- to assist countries enhance the productivity and sustained use of forest and tree resources, with a view to maximize their contribution to rural and socio-economic development;
- to promote the conservation of forest ecosystems and the integration of forests and trees into land-use systems;
- to assist in increasing the value of forest production - both wood and non-wood;
- to support full participation in and equitable sharing of benefits among all people dependent on forestry activities, particulary the most vulnerable groups;
- to provide policy and planning advice to national forestry administrations.
By the end of 1995, there were 228 on-going and approved forestry field programmes, while the corresponding number for 1995 was 219. The composition of the field programme for the years 1994 and 1995, by the categories of the Programme of Work and Budget, is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Composition of FAO's Forestry Field Programme by Number of Projects, Expenditures and by Categories of the Programme of Work and Budget
PROGRAMMES AND SUBPROGRAMMES
No. of projects
Expend.
No. of projects
Budget
Forest Resources and Environment
Forest Products
Forest Institutions, Training
TOTAL
Note: A large number of projects are cross-sectoral, i.e. cover several disciplines. In the above classification the projects are categorized according to their main activity.
Table 2. Regional distribution of the forestry field programme by categories of the Programme of Work and Budget
REGION
Forest Resources and Environment
Forest Products
Forest Institutions
TOTAL by region
No of projects
No of projects
No of projects
No of projects
% of total expenditure/budget for 94-95
Africa
Asia-Pacific
Latin America and Caribbean
Near East
Since 1995, the Operations Service of the Forestry Department (FODO), which operated the FAO forestry field projects, has been absorbed in the newly established Technical Cooperation Department. Forestry projects are technically backstopped by the technical divisions in the Forestry Department, i.e. projects in the field of forest genetic resources and biological diversity in forest ecosystems are technically backstopped by the Forest Resources Division.
SIZE AND ACTIVITIES OF FAO's FIELD PROGRAMME IN FOREST GENETIC RESOURCES
An overview of FAO's field programme in forest genetic resources is given in Tables 3 and 4. The tables are based on the "FAO Forestry Department Project Catalogue" of December 1994. Projects included in the tables have main activities in one or more of the following four categories: (i) tree seed procurement; (ii) tree improvement and conservation of forest genetic resources; (iii) nature conservation and nature protection; and (iv) forest management. The judgement and selection of which projects to include in the tables, based on relative importance in them of components in the field of forest genetic resources, has been made by the Secretariat of the present Panel; the tables should thus only be used as a general indicator of the size of the field programme in forest genetic resources.
A total of 61 projects have activities falling in this field (see Table 3). The total external funding, over the whole duration of the projects (which generally ranges from 1 to 5 years) is of some $US 120 million^10 FAO forest genetic resources projects are found in all regions, with a majority of projects in Africa and the Asia/Pacific region in regard to both number of projects and total expenditure.
^10 Note that the national contributions of host governments, which covers local costs, is not included in this figure.
As far as the ecological coverage is concerned, the humid and dry tropics are fairly equally represented. The majority of projects in the dry tropics is located in Africa with only a few projects in dry-zone Asia/Pacific, whereas on the other hand most of the projects in the humid zone are situated in the Asia/Pacific region.
Table 4 lists the forest genetic resources projects divided by region and by main activity. It is interesting to note the importance, in all regions, of projects on in situ conservation and sustainable use of forests, and on ecosystem conservation. Their increase has shown a common trend in recent years, especially in Africa and Latin America. In Asia, the proportion of projects focused on seed procurement and tree breeding is relatively high. In addition to the main activities listed in the table, all projects also include components of support to national institutions, training and dissemination and exchange of information.
Table 3. Regional and Ecological Distribution of FAO Field Projects in the Field of Forest Genetic Resources
REGION
Total no. of projects
Approx. Total expenditure US$ million
Dry tropics expend, in US$ million
Humid tropics expend, in US$ million
Temperate expend, in US$ million
Africa
Asia & Pacific
Latin America & the Caribbean
Near East & Europe
TOTAL
* Including a Regional project covering more than one ecological zone
Table 4. Number of projects in the regions by main activities
MAIN ACTIVITY
Africa
Asia and Pacific
Latin America and Caribbean
Near East and Europe
TOTAL
Seed collection, production, storage and exchange
Testing/breeding
In situ conservation of forest genetic resources and forest management
Protected areas and ecosystem conservation
<section>a</section>
Appendix 6. Forest Genetic Resources Priorities (by Region, Species and Operation): Species Identified as Top Priority for FAO Coordinated Activities
NOTES
(i) General Observations
The present Appendix, complemented by Appendix 7, represents an up-dated and revised version of the earlier tables which appeared as Appendix 6 in the Report on the 8th Session of FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources (FAO 1994).
FAO's mandate, and that of the present Expert Panel, relates to genetic resources of species of socio-economic value for agricultural and forestry development, with special reference to intra-specific genetic variation found in these species. Endangered and vulnerable species, and species under threat of depletion listed i.a. in documentation published by the World Conservation Union (IUCN), are included only if they meet these basic development criteria. Similarly, although in exceptional cases referring to genera, the list does not refer to ecosystems or biota.
The Appendix does not present an exhaustive list of woody perennial species in need of attention at regional, ecoregional and global levels. The present list aims at providing information on those species and provenances which the FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources, during its 9th Session in October 1995. considered should be given highest, relative priority in the forest genetic resources programme of FAO's Forestry Department. The list, arranged by regions and sub-regions, indicates priority on a scale from 1 to 3 (see below), for the various operational steps identified: exploration, evaluation, conservation and utilization of germplasm (including selection and breeding).
The Panel of Experts recognized that many of the priority ratings must be considered tentative; the list will need continuing up-dating and must be modified in the light of new information, knowledge and needs.
While not under-rating the fundamental importance of locally occurring species and the need to gain more information and to ensure the conservation and wise use of this category of woody perennials, the present list focusses on those species which, in addition to their local importance, are of actual or potential value also in other countries or areas; or which may be of immediate importance in improvement and breeding programmes of related species in their country of origin and in other countries.
The present list should be reviewed in conjunction with the more detailed and complete lists of national, regional and global priority species and activities, shown in Appendix 7. There is, furthermore, a need to supplement both lists drawn up by the Panel (Appendices 6 and 7), with more detailed, national lists of priorities at local and national level.
(ii) "End Use of Species" (columns 1-4)
Only species of highest priority in one (or at times, several) of the four, general end use categories identified, are included. The present list includes those species/provenances which the Panel of Experts considered should receive maximum priority in the forest genetic resources programme of FAO (See Appendix 7 for a complete list of priority species and operations).
Column 1, "Industrial Wood", includes those species whose main use is for sawn logs, timber, heavy construction wood, plywood, chip and particle board, wood pulp etc.
Column 2, " Industrial Non-Wood Products", includes those species which are mainly used for the production of gums, resins, oils, tannins or other products used in small, medium and large-scale local and non-local industries.
Column 3, "Fuelwood, Posts, Poles", includes those species producing mainly firewood and wood used for the production of charcoal and energy; and those used for the production of roundwood used on-farm.
Column 4, "Other Uses (goods, services)", is a category which includes species grown mainly for the production of food, fodder, and for land stabilization, soil amelioration, for shade, shelter and other environmental values.
Complementary information is given in the "Remarks"-column.
(iii) Operations/Activities
Three priority ratings are used, as follows:
(1) Highest priority;
(2) Prompt action recommended;
(3) Action is important, but of less urgency than that for species listed as priority (1) and (2).
Complementary information is given in the " Remarks"-column.
(E) in the "Remarks"- column, signifies endangered with extinction or severe depletion of the gene pool (see also paragraph 2 of "General Observations" above).
SPECIES
End use of species
Operations/Activities
REMARKS
Exploration & collection
Evaluation
Conservation
Germplasm use
1. WESTERN USA/CANADA
Taxus brevifolia
Use for taxol
2. EASTERN USA/CANADA
Castanea dentata
3. MEXICO
Astronium graveolens
(E). National interest
Cedrela odorata
PVT and PGT
Cupressus lindleyi
Dendropanax arboreus
PVT in progress
Pinus chiapensis
PVT and PGT
P. patula
PVT (Int.)
Swietenia macrophylla
PVT, PGT, SO. (E) certain populations
4. CARRIBEAN, CENTRAL AMERICA, COLOMBIA, VENEZUELA AND ECUADOR
Alnus acuminata
PVT, PGT in progress. In situ stands established
Bombacopsis quinata
PVT, PGT in progress. SO established. (E) in most parts of range
Cedrela odorata
PVT, PGT in progress. (E) in most parts of range
Cordia alliodora
PVT, PGT, CLT in progress. SO established. Breeding systems studies completed
Gliricidia sepium
PVT in progress. In situ and ex situ stands, SO established
Leucaena leucocephala
PVT in progress. SO
Pinus caribaea var. hondurensis
PVT, PGT in progress. In situ and ex situ stands established
P. tecunumanii
PVT and PGT in progress. in situ and ex situ stands established
Swietenia macrophylla
PVT and genetic variability studies in progress. (E) in most parts of range. Resistance trials established
Tabebuia rosea
Restricted prov. collections
5. SOUTH AMERICA (EXCEPT COLOMBIA, VENEZUELA AND ECUADOR)
Aniba duckei
(E) all range. Medicinal products
Aspidosperma polyneuron
(E) all range. Overexploitation
Bertholetia excelsa
Human food, wood. Species of social importance
Cedrela odorata
(E) all range. Overexploitation
Dalbergia nigra
(E) all range
Maytenus ilicifolia
(E) all range. Medicinal use
Nothofagus alessandrii
(E) all range
Ocotea catharinensis
(E) in parts of range
Swietenia macrophylla
(E) in parts of range
6. NORTHERN AND CENTRAL EUROPE
No species were identified as top priority species for FAO coordinated activities
7. MEDITERRANEAN REGION, SOUTHERN EUROPE AND NEAR EAST
Acacia nilotica
Int. PVT in progress
A. Senegal
A. tortilis (incl. ssp. raddiana)
Int. PVT in progress
Cedrus atlantica
Int. testing in progress
C. libani
Int. testing. National stands in Lebanon (E). Conservation priority activities apply to Lebanon
Prosopis cineraria
Quercus suber
Tetraclinis articulata
8. SOUTH AND EAST ASIA EXCL. CHINA AND INDIA
Acacia mangium
Int. PVT in progress. Need for resistance selection. Work on hybridization (with A. auriculiformis) needed
Azadirachta indica (incl. var. siamensis)
Int. PVT in progress
Bamboo
Coperation with INBAR. Excellent MPTS
Casuarina equisetifolia
Int. PVT in progress
C. junghuhniana
Int. PVT in progress
Dipterocarpus alatus
Excellent wood for construction and veneer purposes
Eucalyptus camaldulensis
Int. PVT in progress. Work on hybridization required
E. urophylla
Int. PVT in progress. Work on hybridization required
Hopea odorata
Priority species for ASEAN. Excellent wood for furniture
Paraserianthes falcataria
Excellent wood for furniture and veneer purposes. Use on-farm
Parkia javanica
MPTS
Parkia speciosa
MPTS
Pterocarpus indicus
Excellent for construction purposes. Priority species for ASEAN
P. macrocarpus
Excellent for construction purposes. Priority species for ASEAN
Rattan
(E) in parts of range. Coperation with INBAR. MPTS
Rhizophora apiculata
Some populations threatened by aquaculture in the region. No breeding program
Shorea spp.
Potential hardwood for construction purposes.
Tectona grandis
Very important species
9. NORTH, NORTH-EAST AND CENTRAL ASIA INCL. CHINA AND INDIA
Acacia Senegal
Acacia catechu
Acacia tortilis
Albizia procera
India
Alnus daurica
A. japonica
China, Japan, Korea
A. nepalensis
Azadirachta indica
Int. PVT initiated
Bamboo
(Bambusa, Dendrocalamus spp.)
Calamus spp.
Overexploited, poor regeneration, recalcitrant seeds
Casuarina equisetifolia (exotic)
C. junghuhniana (exotic)
Cedrus deodara
(E) in parts of range
Chamaecyparis obtusa
Dalbergia sissoo
Wide genetic variation
Fokienia hodginsi
Endemic to China. Monogenus
Fraxinus mandshurica
Hippophae rhamnoides
Fruits with high vitamin C content
Juglans mandshurica
J. regia
Kataleeria pubescens
PVT. Fast growing, good timber species
Pinus caribaea var. bahamensis
P. caribaea var. caribaea
P. massoniana
P. roxburghii
Resin producing
Populus euphratica
Dry areas
Quercus mongolica
Rattan
Tectona grandis
Toona microcarpa
MPTS
T. sinensis
T. sureni
10. AFRICA
Acacia nilotica
Int. PVT in progress. W. Africa to be completed. Problems with natural regeneration
A. senegal
(E) populations in N parts of range. Problems with natural regeneration
A. tortilis (incl. ssp raddiana)
Int. PVT in progress. W. Africa to be completed.
Azadirachta indica (exotic)
Int. PVT in progress
Dalbergia melanoxylon
(E)
Eucalyptus camaldulensis (exotic)
Faidherbia albida
Seed collections, PVT, PGT and population genetics studies in progress
Gmelina arborea (exotic)
New collections available for testing
Heritiera (syn. Tarrietia) utilis
Irringia spp.
(E)
Khaya spp.
Selection for resistance to shoot borer
Parkia biglobosa
Prov. collections and gene ecological studies in progress
Prosopis spp. (exotic)
Prunus africana
(E). Recalcitrant seed. Field genebank
Pterocarpus angolensis
In situ cons. in progress. Problem of die-back disease
Sclerocarya birrea
Recalcitrant seed. Field: ICRAF in SADC countries, FAO in CILSS countries
Tamarindus indica
11. AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
Acacia colei
Human food (seeds) value under assessment
A. mangium
Biogeographic descriptions completed, sampling, PVT. Hybrids being developed with A. auriculiformis
Casuarina equisetifolia
Int. PVT underway
Eucalyptus camaldulensis
Taxonomic assessment ongoing
Grevillea robusta
12. PACIFIC ISLANDS
Canarium harveyii
Endospermum medullosum
Intsia bijuga
Pterocarpus indica
Santalum spp.
Swietenia macrophylla
Intro. and eval. of prov. from natural range desirable
<section>b</section>
Appendix 7. Forest Genetic Resources Priorities (by Region, Species and Operation): Species Identified as High, Global, Regional and/or National Priority
NOTES
(i) General Observations
The present Appendix, which complements Appendix 6 and includes the species and provenances listed in it, represents an up-dated and revised version of the earlier tables which appeared as Appendix 7 in the Report on the 8th Session of FAO Panel of Experts on Forest Gene Resources (FAO 1994).
FAO's mandate, and that of the present Expert Panel, relates to genetic resources of species of socio-economic value for agricultural and forestry development, with special reference to intra-specific genetic variation found in these species. Endangered and vulnerable species, and species under threat of depletion listed i.a. in documentation published by the World Conservation Union (IUCN), are included only if they meet these basic development criteria. Similarly, although sometimes referring to genera, the list does not refer to ecosystems or biota.
The Appendix does not present an exhaustive list of woody perennial species in need of attention at national, regional, ecoregional and global levels. The list is aimed at providing information on those species and provenances which the Expert Panel during its 8th Session in June 1993 considered to should be given highest, relative priority in the forest genetic resources programme of FAO's Forestry Department; and of other international, regional, bilateral and national institutions and agencies, including those of national and international non-governmental organizations and the private sector. The list, arranged by regions and sub-regions indicates, whenever possible, priority on a scale from 1 to 3 (see below), for the various operational steps identified: exploration, evaluation, conservation and utilization of germplasm (including selection and breeding).
The Panel recognized that many of the priority ratings must be considered tentative. At times, basic information necessary for precise rating was lacking, and in this case the list may include only a mention of the genus in question (implying an urgent need for exploration).
While not under-rating the fundamental importance of locally occurring species and the need to gain more information and to ensure the conservation and wise use of this category of woody perennials, the present list focuses mainly on those species which, in addition to local importance, are of actual or potential value also in other countries or areas; or which may be of immediate importance in improvement and breeding programmes of related species in their country of origin and other countries.
There is thus a need to supplement the present list with more detailed, national lists of priorities for action at a local and national level.
(ii) "End Use of Species" (columns 1-4)
Only species of high actual or potential priority in one (or at times, several) of the four, general end use categories identified, are included.
Column 1, "Industrial Wood", includes those species whose main use is for sawn logs, timber, heavy construction wood, plywood, chip and particle board, wood pulp etc.
Column 2, "Industrial Non-Wood Products", includes those species which are mainly used for the production of gums, resins, oils, tannins or other products used in small, medium and large-scale local and non-local industries.
Column 3, "Fuel-wood, Posts, Poles", includes, those species producing mainly firewood and wood used for the production of charcoal and energy; and those used for the production of roundwood used on-farm.
Column 4, "Other Uses (goods, services)", is a category which includes species grown mainly for the production of food, fodder, and for land stabilization, soil amelioration, for shade, shelter and other environmental values.
Complementary information is given in the "Remarks"-column.
(iii) Operations/Activities
Three priority ratings are used, as follows:
(1) Highest priority;
(2) Prompt action recommended;
(3) Action is important, but of less urgency than that for species listed as priority (1) and (2).
Complementary information is given in the "Remarks"-column.
(E) in the "Remarks"-column, signifies endangered with extinction or severe depletion of the gene pool (see also paragraph 2 of "General Observations" above).
SPECIES
End use of species
Operations/Activities
REMARKS
Exploration & collection
Evaluation
Conservation
Germplasm use
1. WESTERN USA/CANADA
Abies amabilis
Int. PVT
A. bracteata
A. concolor
A. grandis
Int. PVT
A. lasiocarpa
Int. PVT
A. magnifies var. shastaensis
A. procera
Int. PVT, breeding programs
Acer macrophyllum
In situ cons. stands
Alnus rhombifolia
In situ cons. stands
A. rubra
PVT. Seed in storage for int. PVT
A. sinuata
In situ cons. stands
A. tenuifolia
In situ cons. stands
Arbutus menziesii
In situ cons. stands
Betula fontinalis
In situ cons. stands
B. papyrifera
In situ cons. stands
Castanopsis chrysophylla
In situ cons. stands
Celtis douglasii
In situ cons. stands
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana
Root rot affecting species: Phytophera lateralis
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis
Tests and collections
C. macrocarpa
Cornus nuttalli
Crataegus douglasii
C. columbiana
Cupressus arizonica (complex)
C. bakeri
Fraxinus latifolia
Juniperus occidentalis
J. scopulorum
Larix laricina
L. lyallii
L. occidentalis
Breeding trials.
Libocedus decurrens
Lithocarpus densiflorus
Malus fusca
Picea breweriana
Picea engelmannii
Int. PVT. Tests and collections
P. glauca
Int. PVT. Breeding.
P. sitchensis
Int. PVT. Tests.
Pinus albicaulis
P. arizonica
P. attenuata
P. chihuahuana
P. contorta
Int. PVT. Recent bulk collections.
P. engelmanii
P. flexilis
P. jeffreyi
P. lambertiana
Int. PVT
P. monticola
Breeding progr.
P. ponderosa
Breeding progr.
P. radiata
Int. PVT. Gene pool stands
P. washoensis
Populus tremuloides
Collections
P. trichocarpa
Pseudotsuga menziesii
Int. PVT. Breeding progr.
P. macrocarpa
Quercus chrysolepis
Q. garryana
British Columbia, USA
Q. kelloggii
Rhamnus purshiana
In situ cons. stands
Salix amygdaloides
In situ cons. stands
S. hindsiana
In situ cons. stands
S. hookenana
In situ cons. stands
S. lasiandra
In situ cons. stands
S. lasiolepis
In situ cons. stands
S. scouleriana
In situ cons. stands
Sequoia sempervirens
Collections
Taxus brevifolia
Use for taxol
Thuja plicata
Collection and testing
Tsuga heterophylla
Collection and testing
T. mertensiana
Collection
Umbellularia california
In situ cons. stands
2. EASTERN USA/CANADA
Abies balsa mea
Breeding progr.
A. fraseri
Breeding progr.
Acer saccharum
Betula alleghaniensis
Carya cordiformis
C. illinoensis
Of recent interest to China
C. ovata
Castanea dentata
Celtis tenuifolia
Fraxinus americana
F. quadrangulata
Gymnocladus dioieus
Juglans cinerea
Ex situ cons. required in Canada
J. nigra
Larix laricina
Liquidambar styraciflua
Liriodendron tulipifera
Collection and testing in Eastern U.S.
Magnolia acuminata
Picea glauca
Breeding progr.
P. mariana
Breeding progr.
P. rubens
Platenus occidentalis
Pinus banksiana
Breeding progr.
P. clausa
P. rigida
P. echinata
Breeding progr. in Eastern U.S.
P. elliottii
Breeding progr. in Eastern U.S.
P. palustris
Breeding progr. in Eastern U.S.
P. resinosa
Breeding progr.
P. serotina
P. strobus
Breeding progr.
P. taeda
Breeding progr.
P. virginiana
Populus balsamifera
High potential for biomass on medium fertility soils
P. deltoides
Breeding progr.
P. tremuloides
Breeding progr. in U.S.
Prunus serotina
Canadian populations at extremes of range
Ptelea trifoliata
Quercus alba
Canadian populations at extremes of range
O. borealis
O. macrocarpa
Robinia pseudoacacia
Taxodium ascendens
T. distichum
Torreya taxifolia
Ulmus americana
Resistance breeding progr.
3. MEXICO
Abies durangensis
Rare
A. quatemalensis
A. vejari
Rare
Astronium graveolens
(E). National interest
Brosimum alicastrum
Bucida buseras
Bursera simaruba
Calophyllum brasiliense
Cedrela odorata
PVT and PGT
Ceiba pentandra
Cordia alliadora
C. dodecandra
Cupressus lindleyi
Cupressus benthami
(E) some provenances
Dendropanax arboreus
PVT in progress
Entrolobiun cyclocarpum
Hymenaea courbaril
Lonchocarpus castilloi
Lysiloma bahamensis
Metopium brownei
Picea chihuahuana
(E)
P. mexicana
(E)
Pinus ayacahuite
P. ayacahuite var. brachyptera
P. ayacahuite var. veitchii
P. arizonica
P. chiapensis
PVT and PGT
P. cooperi
P. durangensis
P. gregii
(E) some provenances
P. engelmannii
P. herrerai
P. michoacana
P. montezumae
P. oocarpa
P. oocarpa var. ochoterenai
P. patula
PVT (Int.)
P. pseudostrobus
P. teocote
Piscidia communis
Pseudotsuga flahaulti
Praxinus uhdei
Prosopis spp.
Roseodendron donell-smithii
Simaruba glauca
Spondias mombin
Sweetia panamensis
Swietenia macrophyIla
PVT, PGT, SO. (E) certain populations
Tabeburia rosea
Terminalia amazonia
4. CARRIBEAN, CENTRAL AMERICA, COLOMBIA, VENEZUELA AND ECUADOR
Acacia caven
PVT in progress
Albizia saman
Albizia niopoides
PVT, SO. (E) in parts of range
A. quachepele
PVT, PGT in progress. Vegetative propagation studies
Alnus acuminata
PVT, PGT in progress. In situ stands established
Bombacopsis quinata
PVT, PGT in progress. SO established. (E) in most parts of range
Calliandra calothyrsus
PVT in progress
Cedrela odorata
PVT, PGT in progress. (E) in most parts of range
C. tonduzzi
(E) in most parts of range
Cordia alliodora
PVT, PGT, CLT in progress. SO established. Breeding systems studies completed
Cupressus lusitanica
PVT and PGT. Ex situ stands established
Diphysa robinioides
Enterolubium cyclocarpum
Erythrina spp.
PVT
Guazuma ulmifolia
PVT
Gliricidia sepium
PVT in progress. In situ and ex situ stands, SO established
Inga spp.
Leucaena diversifolia
L. leucocephala
PVT in progress. SO
L. salvadorensis
PVT in progress. SO
Leucaena spp.
Provenances of species from Central America and Mexico available from OFI for PVT
Liquidambar styraciflua
PVT in progress
Pin us ayacahuite
PVT and PGT in progress
P. caribaea var. bahamensis
PVT in progress. Ex situ stands established
P. caribaea var. caribaea
PVT in progress
P. caribaea var. hondurensis
PVT, PGT in progress. In situ and ex situ stands established
P. chiapensis
PVT and PGT in progress
P. maximinoi
PVT in progress
P. occidentalis
In situ stands established
P. oocarpa
PVT in progress. Ex situ stands established
P. pseudostrobus/tenuifolia
PVT in progress. (E) in parts of range
P. tecunumanii
PVT and PGT in progress. In situ and ex situ stands established
Prosopis atcamensis
PVT in progress
P. burkartii
PVT in progress
P. chilensis
PVT in progress
P. juliflora
PVT in progress
P. limensis
PVT in progress
P. siliquastrum
PVT in progress
P. tamarugo
PVT in progress
Swietenia humilis
SO established. Not planted extensively
S. macrophylla
PVT and genetic variability studies in progress. (E) in most parts of range. Resistance trials established
Tabebuia rosea
Restricted prov. collections
Vochysia quatemalensis
PVT, PGT in progress
5. SOUTH AMERICA (EXCEPT COLOMBIA, VENEZUELA AND ECUADOR)
Acacia bahiensis
Acharas sapota
Human food
Agonandra brasiliensis
Amburana acreana
A. cearensis
Aniba duckei
(E) all range. Medicinal products
A. canelilla
(E). Oils
A. firmula
A. fragrans
(E). Oils
A. perutilis
(E) all range
Anadenanthera macrocarpa
Medicinal products
Apuleia leiocarpa
Araucaria angustifolia
A. araucana
Aspidosperma polyneuron
A. pirifolium
A. cylindrocarpum
A. riedelli
Astronium balansae
(E). Endemic
A. fraxinifolium
Austrocedrus chilensis
Auxema oncocalyx
A. glazioviana
Bactris gasipaes
Human food. PVT
Balfourodendron riedelianum
Bauhinia smilacina
Beilschmiedia berteroana
Bertholetia excelsa
Human food, wood. Species of social importance
Britoa guazumaefolia
Human food
Brosimum glaziovii
B. glaudichaudi
Bowdichia nitida
Bumelia sartorum
Medicinal products
Bursera leptophleos
Butia capitata
Ornamental
B. eriospatha
Human food
Caesalpinia echinata
(E)
C. ferrea
Calophyllum brasiliene
Campomanesia phaea
(E). Human food
Carapa guianensis
Oils
Cariniana estrelensis
C. janeirensis
Endemic
C. kulhmannii
Endemic. PVT. Ex situ cons.
C. legalis
C. penduliflora
Endemic. PVT. Ex situ cons.
Caryocar brasiliense
Human food
Cavanillesia arborea
Cedrela fissilis
(E) in parts of range
C. odorata
(E) all range. Overexploitation
Centrolobium robustum
C. microchaete
Chlorophora tictoria
(E) all range
Chloroleucon foliosum
Citronella congonha
Medicinal use
C. megaphylla
Copaiferta guuianensis
Cordia alliodora
C. gerascanthus
(E) parts of range
C. goeldiana
C. tetrandra
C. trichotoma
Couepia schotii
Couratari asterophora
Endemic. PVT. Ex situ cons.
C. atrovinosa
Endemic. PVT. Ex situ cons.
Dalbergia cearensis
D. nigra
(E) all range
Dicypellidium caryophyllatum
Medicinal products
Dipteryx alata
Human food
D. odorata
Oils
Esenbeckia leiocarpa
Eugenia involucrata
Human food
Euterpe edulis
Human food
E. oleracea
Human food
E. precatoria
Feijoa sellowiana
Human food
Fitzroya cupressoides
Gomoterka keule
Hevea brasiliensis
Gum
Hibiscus tiliaceus
Hynenaea courbaril
H. altissima
Ilex paraguaiensis
Tested. Human food (local tea)
Jacaratia spinosa
Human food
Jessenia bataua
Human food
Joannesia princeps
Ex situ cons.
Juglans neotropica
(E) all range
Lecythis pisonis
Human food
Machaerium villosum
Malouetia arborea
Manilkara bidentata
M. huberii
M. rufula
(E) all range
Manihot glaziovii
Marlierea edulis
(E). Human food
Maytenus ilicifolia
(E) all range. Medicinal use
Melanoxilon brauna
Micropholis melinoniana
(E)
Mimosa caesalpinifolia
Myrciaria trunciflora
Human food
Myracrodruon urundeuva
Myrocarpus frondosus
(E)
Myroxilon peruiferum
Nothofagus alessandrii
(E) all range
N. obliqua
N. alpina
Ocotea catharinensis
(E) parts of range
O. porosa
O. pretiosa
Medicinal products
Pachystroma longifolium
Medicinal products
Parinari brasiliensis
Parkia platicephala
Peltogine paniculata
(E) all range
Peltophorum dubium
Pilocarpus jaborandi
(E) all range. Medicinal products
P. pauciflorus
(E) all range
P. pennatifolius
Medicinal products
P. spicatus
(E) all range. Medicinal products
P. trachyllophus
(E) all range. Medicinal products
Pitavia punctata
Pithecellobium racemosum
Plathymenia foluiosa
Pouteria psammophila
Podocarpus lamberti
P. sellowii
(E) all range
Prosopis juliflora
Pseudobombax grandiflorum
Prumnopytis montana
(E) all range
Quassia amara
Quiina glaziovii
Medicinal products
Salix humboldtiana
Schinopsis brasiliensis
S. balansae
(E)
Sophora toromiro
(E). Carving
Spondias macrocarpa
Human food
S. tuberosa
Human food
Stylites andicola
Swietenia macrophylla
(E) in parts of range
Swartzia glazioviana
Syagrus coronata
Tabebuia avellanedae
T. aurea
T. cassinoides
T. impetiginosa
T. serratifolia
Theobroma cacao
Thiloa glaucocarpa
Virola surinamesis
y
Vochisia maxima
V. magnifica
Zeyheria tuberculosa
Ziziphus joazeiro
6. NORTHERN AND CENTRAL EUROPE
Abies alba
PVT. PGT. SO. (E) by pollution
Fraxinus excelsior
Juglans regia
Human food
Larix sukaczewii
In Russia
Picea abies
(E) by pollution in some regions. PVT. PGT. CLT. SO
Pinus sylvestris
Scotland
Populus nigra
Prunus avium
Quercus robur
Northern Europe
Tilia cordata
Ulmus glabra
Elm disease
U. laevis
7. MEDITERRANEAN REGION, SOUTHERN EUROPE AND NEAR EAST
A. marocana
A. nordmanniana/bornmullariana
A. numidica
(E)
A. pinsapo
Acacia albida
Acacia nilotica
Int. PVT in progress
A. Senegal
A. tortilis (incl. ssp. raddiana)
Int. PVT in progress
Cedrus atlantica
Int. testing in progress
C. libani
Int. testing. National stands in Lebanon (E).
Conservation priority activities apply to Lebanon.
Cupressus atlantica
(E)? in parts of range. Drought and frost tolerant. Important for breeding
C. dupreziana
(E). Ex situ cons. stands. Breeding for resistance to Ceridium cardinale
C. sempervirens
Breeding for resistance to Seridium cardinale
Picea omorika
In situ cons. stands
Pinus brutia
Int. PVT. Further sampling desirable
P. eldarica
Int. PVT. (E) some provenances
P. halepensis
Int. PVT
P. laricio mauretanica
(E)
P. pinaster
Int. PVT
P. pinea
Platanus orientalis
(E)? some provenances
Prosopis cineraria
Quercus aegilops
Q. suber
Tetraclinis articulata
Ulmus wallichiana
(E)
8. SOUTH AND EAST ASIA EXCL. CHINA AND INDIA
Acacia auriculiformis
Int. PVT in progress
A. catechu
MPTS for farmers
A. cressicarpa
y
PVT in progress
A. mangium
Int. PVT in progress. Need for resistance selection. Work on hybridization (with A. auriculiformis} needed
Afzelia xylocarpa
Construction and furniture purposes
Agathis spp.
Indonesia and Malaysia
Alstonia scholaris
Aquilaria spp.
Medicinal products
Artocarpus heterophyllus
Excellent MPTS, used on farms. Need for trials on farms
Araucauria cunninghamii
Int. PVT in progress
Araucauria hunsteinii
Int. PVT in progress
Azadirachta indica (incl. var. siamensis)
Int. PVT in progress
Bamboo
Coperation with INBAR. Excellent MPTS
Bombax ceiba
Important on-farm tree species
Broussonetia papyrifera
Important on-farm tree species
Cassia siamea
For dry areas within the region
Casuarina equisetifolia
Int. PVT in progress
C. junghuhniana
Int. PVT in progress
Dalbergia cochinchinensis
Excellent wood
D. latifolia
Excellent wood
Dipterocarpus alatus
Excellent wood for construction and veneer purposes
Dyera costulata
(E). Gum
Endospermum malaccensis
Construction wood
E. peltatum
Construction wood
Eucalyptus camaldulensis
Int. PVT in progress. Work on hybridization needed
E. deglupta
Int. PVT needed
E. pellita
Promising species trials
E. urophylla
Int. PVT in progress. Work on hybridization needed
Gmelina arborea
Priority species for ASEAN
Hopea odorata
Priority species for ASEAN. Excellent wood for furniture
Leucaena leucocephala
MPTS. Need for selection for psyllid resistence
Paraserianthes falcataria
Excellent wood for furniture and veneer purposes. Use on-farm
Parashorea stellata
Parkia javanica
MPTS
Parkia speciosa
MPTS
Peltophorum dasyrachis
Promising MPTS (pioner species)
Peronema canensis
Promising MPTS
Pinus kesiya
Priority species for ASEAN
Pinus merkusii
Priority species for ASEAN
Pterocarpus indicus
Excellent for construction purposes. Priority species for ASEAN
P. macrocarpus
Excellent for construction purposes. Priority species for ASEAN
P. marsupium
Rattan
(E) in parts of range. Coperation with INBAR. MPTS
Rhizophora spp.
Some populations threatened by aquaculture in the region
Santalum album
Promising MPTS
Shorea spp.
Potential hardwood for construction purposes.
Swietenia spp.
Tectona grandis
Very important species
9. NORTH, NORTH-EAST AND CENTRAL ASIA INCL. CHINA AND INDIA
Abies beshanzuensis
China. (E)
A. chensiensis
A. delavayi
A. ernestii
A. fabri
A. firma
A. georgei
A. holophylla
Important for greenery and Christmas tree growing. Tolerant to frost
A. nephrolepis
Important for greenery and Christmas tree growing. Tolerant to frost
A. kawakamii
A. pindrow
India. Hybrid populations occurring
A. sachalinensis
Important for greenery and Christmas tree growing. Tolerant to frost
A. sibirica
A. spectabilis
India. Hybrid population occurring.
A. veitchii
A. yuanbaoshanensis
China
A. ziyuanensis
China
Acacia nilotica
India. Gums
A. senegal
y
A. catechu
A. tortilis
Acer buergerianum
A. planatum
A. oblongum
A. truncatum
Acrocarpus fraxinifolius
Albizia alata
India
A. chinensis
A. lebbek
India
A. procera
India
Alnus cremastogyne
A. daurica
A. japonica
China, Japan, Korea
A. nepalensis
A. mandshurica
Nitrogen fixing in cold regions
A. sibirica
A. trabeculosa
Amentotaxus yunnanensis
China
Anthocephalus chinensis
Aquilaria spp.
Overexploited, poor regeneration, recalcitrant seeds
Azadirachta indica
Int. PVT initiated
Bamboo
(Bambusa, Dendrocalamus spp.)
Betula chinensis
B. luminifera
B. pencula
Bombax ceiba
India
Boswella serrata
India. Overexploited.
Calamus spp.
Overexploited, poor regeneration, recalcitrant seeds
Calycanthus chinensis
China
Camellia oleifera
Canarium pimela
Carya cathayensis
Castanea henryi
C. mollissima
Casuarina equisetifolia (exotic)
India
C. junghuhniana (exotic)
China
Catalpa lungei
C. ducloxii
Cedrus deodara
China and India. (E) in parts of range
Celtis sinensis
Cephalotaxus hainanensis
China
C. lanceolata
China
C. oliveri
China
Cercidiphyllum japonicum
(E) China
Chamaecyparis formosensis
China
C. obtusa
Choerospondias axillaris
Chosenia arbutifolia
Chukrassia velutina
India. (E) some provenances
Cinnamomum camphora
C. cassia
Craigia yunnanensis
China
Cryptomeria fortunei
C. japonica
Cupressus chengiana
C. duclouxiana
C. funebris
C. gigantea
China
C. torulosa
India. Soil binding timber species for dry exposed sites.
Cunninghamia lanceolata
C. konishii
Cycas micholitzii
China
C. panzhihuaensis
China. (E)
Dacrydium pierrei
Dalbergia balsamae
D. latifolia
India
D. odorifera
D. obtusifolia
D. sissoo
India. Wide genetic variation
Davidia involucrata var. vilmoriniana
China
Dipterocarpus spp.
India
Dipteronia dyeriana
China
Duabanga grandiflora
Elaeagnus angustifolia
Erythropholeum fordii
Eusideroxylon spp.
Overexploited, very slow growth, recalcitrant seeds
Eucalyptus spp.
Mainly E. globolus, E. grandis, E. tereticornis, E. camaldulensis, E. citriodora. China and India
Eucommia ulmoides
Monogenus. Endemic to China
Fagus longipetiolata
(E). Chinese herbal medicine
Firmiana major
China
Fokienia hodginsi
Endemic to China. Monogenus
Fraxinus chinensis
F. chinensis var. rhychophylla
Fraxinus mandshurica
F. segdiana
Ginkgo biloba
Seed used for human food and for medicinal purposes
Gleditsia sinensis
Glyptostrobus pensilis
(E)
Gmelina arborea
Int. PVT
G. hainanensis
Gonystylus spp.
Overexploited, poor regeneration, recalcitrant seeds
Haloxylon ammondendron
H. persium
Hardwickia binata
India
Hippophae rhamnoides
China. Fruits with high vitamin C content
Holotelea spp.
India
Hopea spp.
China
G. parviflora
India
Illicium verum
China. Medicin and spice
Juglans cathayensis
J. mandshurica
J. regia
Himalayas. Nuts
J. sigillata
Ketaleeria hainanensis
China
K. pubescens
PVT. Fast growing, good timber species
Koompassia malaccensis
Overexploited, poor regeneration, recalcitrant seeds
Larix griffithiana
Rare. Restricted distribution Sikkhim, Nepal Himalayas
L. gmelini
L. leptolepis
L. olgensis (syn. L. gmelini var. olgensis)
Important for hybridization
L. potaninii
L. sibirica
Work in progress. China
Liriodendron chinense
Liquidamber formosana
Madhuca spp.
China
M. indica
India
Magnolia officinalis
China. Medicin
Mains komarovii
China
M. sieversii
China
Mangifera persiciforma
Mangifera spp.
Timber and ornamental tree
Manglietia aromatica
China
M. fordiana
M. glauca
M. patungensis
China
Melia azedarach
M. toosendan
Mesua ferra
Metasequoia glyptostroboides
Michelia spp.
M. wilsonii
China
Moringa oleifera
India. Agroforestry
Mytilaria laosiensis
Neobalanocarpus heimii
Overexploited, poor regeneration, recalcitrant seeds
Nyssa sinensis
N. japonica
Ormosia henryi
O. hesiei
O. macrophylla
Parashorea chinensis var. kwangsiensis
China
Paulownia spp.
Work in progress. China
P. elongata
P. fargesii
P. fortunei
P. kawakamii
P. tomentosa
Phellodendron amurensis
Phoebe bournei
Picea asperata
P. aurantiaca
China
P. brachytyla
P. brachytyla var. complanata
P. crassifolia
P. jezoensis
P. koraiensis
P. likiangensis
P. meyeri
P. montigena
China
P. neoveitchii
P. obovata
P. purpurea (syn. P. likiangensis var. purpurea)
P. schrenkiana
P. smithiana
India. Watercatchments. Poor regeneration
P. spinulosa
India
P. wilsonii
Pinus armandi
(E) in parts of range. Some occurrences in Japan protected
P. bhutanica
Bhutan
P. bungeana
Endemic to China
P. caribaea var. bahamensis
P. caribaea var. caribaea
P. dabeshanensis
China
P. densata
P. gerardiana
India, restricted to two dry valleys of inner Himachel Pradesh
P. densiflora
PVT in Japan, S. Korea
P. fenzeliana
P. kesiya
India. (E) some provenances
P. koraiensis
(E) in parts of range. Some areas in Japan protected. China
P. massoniana
China
P. merkusii
P. morrisonicola
P. pentaphylla
(E) in parts of range. Some occurrences in Japan protected
P. parviflora
P. pumila
P. roxburghii
India. Resin producing
P. sylvestris var. mongolica
P. tabulaeformis
China. PVT, PGT, SO
P. taiwanensis
P. takahasii
P. thunbergii
P. wallichiana (syn. P. griffithii)
India. Vigorous regeneration
P. wangii
China
P. yunnanensis
Pistachia chinensis
P. vera
Human food (nuts)
Platycladus orientalis
Species for semi-arid areas
Platycarya strobilacea
Podocarpus nagi
Populus ciliata
India. Himalayas.
P. deltoides
India
P. euphratica
China. Dry areas
P. koreana
P. maximowiczii
P. simonii
P. suaveolens
P. tomentosa
P. ussuriensis
P. yunnanensis
Prosopis spp.
Prunus amygdalus
Pseudolarix amabilis
Pseudotaxus chienii
P. brevifolia
P. gaussenii
P. sinensis
Pterocarpus spp.
Pterocarya paliuras (syn. Cyclocrya paliurus)
Quercus mongolica
Q. spp.
India. (E)
Rattan
Rhododendron spp.
Rhoiptelea chilianta
China
Salix alba
S. babylonica
S. capitata
S. matsudana
S. mongolica
Santalum album
India
Sapium sebiferum
Sassafras tzumu
Schima superba
S. wallichii
Sciadopitys verticillata
India
Sesbania spp.
Shorea assamica
India
Shorea spp.
India
Sinowilsonia xylocarpa
China
Syzygium cumini
India. High genetic variation, polyembryony chromosomal races
Taiwania cryptomerioides
(E)
T. flousiana
(E)
Tectona grandis
Terminalia spp.
India
Thuja sutchuenensis
China
Tilia amurensis
Toona microcarpa
MPTS
T. sinensis
T. sureni
Torreya grandis
T. jackii
China
Trochodendron aralioides
China
Tsooniodendron odorum
China
Tsuga chinensis
T. dumosa
India. Eastern Himalaya
Ulmus laevis
U. japonica
U. macrocarpa
U. parviflora
U. propinqua
Vatica guangxiensis
China
V. hainanensis
Xanthoceras sorbifolia
Zelkova schneideriana
Zenia inidignis
Endemic to China
10. AFRICA
Acacia auriculiformis (exotic)
Prov. collection
A. crassicarpa (exotic)
A. erioloba
PVT in progress
A. holosericea (exotic)
Prov. collection
A. karroo
PVT in progress
A. mangium (exotic)
A. nilotica
Int. PVT in progress. W. Africa to be completed. Problems with natural regeneration
A. polyacantha
A. Senegal
(E) populations in N parts of range. Problems with natural regeneration
A. seyal
A. tortilis (incl. ssp raddiana)
Int. PVT in progress. W. Africa to be completed.
Afzelia guanzensis
Albizia spp.
Alletia tunimanii
Androstachys johnsonii
Antiaris toxicoria
Aucoumea klaineana
Azadirachta indica (exotic)
Int. PVT in progress
Balanites aegyptiaca
(E) in Zimbabwe
Bersama tysoniana
Medicinal products. (E) overexploited in South Africa
Bikiaea plurijuga
In situ cons. stands in Zambia and Zimbabwe
Bivinia jalbertii
Boscia spp.
(E)
Brachylaena hutchinsii
Burtdavya nyasica
Chlorophora excelsa
(E)
C. regia
Colophospermum mopane
In situ cons. stands established in Zimbabwe
Combretum apiculatum
Dacryodes edulis
Dalbergia melanoxylon
(E)
Dichrostachys cinerea
Prov. collections proposed by OFI/NRI
Entandrophragma spp.
Breeding for resistance to shoot borer
Eucalyptus camaldulensis (exotic)
E. saligna (exotic)
Faidherbia albida
Seed collections, PVT, PGT and population genetics studies in progress
Gmelina arborea (exotic)
New collections available for testing
Guarea cedrata
Gymnostemon zaizou
(E) some provenances
Heritiera (syn. Tarrietia) utilis
Hyphaena petersiana
H. ventricosa
Irringia spp.
(E)
Irvingia gabonensis
(E) some provenances
I. grandifolia
Juniperus procera
(E) some provenances
Khaya spp.
Selection for resistance to shoot borer
Lovoa spp.
(E)
Maesopsis eminii
Mansonia altissima
Markhamia lutea
(E) some provenances. PVT, PGT in progress
Melia volkensii
Milletia stuhlmannii
Mitragyna ciliata
Nesogordonia papavorifera
(E) some provenances
Nauclea diderrichii
Ocotea bullata
(E) some provenances
O. kenyensis
O. usambarensis
Olea capensis
Parkhamii utea
(E) some provenances. PVT, PGT commenced in East Africa
Parkia biglobosa
Prov. collections and gene ecological studies in progress
Pericopsis angolensis
Heavily exploited for carving
P. elata
(E) some provenances
Pinus maximinoi (exotic)
(E) in parts of range
P. oocarpa (exotic)
PVT in southern Africa
P. roxburghii (exotic)
Podocarpus spp.
Prosopis spp. (exotic)
P. africana
Protea gaguedi
Prunus africana
(E). Recalcitrant seed. Field genebank
Pterocarpus angolensis
In situ cons. in progress. Problem of die-back disease
P. erinacesis
In situ cons. in progress
P. lucens
Problem of die-back disease
P. soyauxii
Raphia faranifera
Sclerocarya birrea
Recalcitrant seed. Field: ICRAF in SADC countries, FAO in CILSS countries
Sesbania spp.
PVT of S. sesban in progress in Zimbabwe, Zambia and Malawi
Tamarindus indica
Tectona grandis (exotic)
Terminalia ivorensis
Int. prov. collections in progress
T. superba
Int. prov. collections in progress
Tarrietia utilis
Recalcitrant seeds
Triplochiton scleroxylon
Seed production, unreliable, poor
Turraeanthus africanus
Uapaca kirkiana
Seed collections in progress in SADC region
Vernonia amygdalina
Seed collected in W. Africa
Vitellaria (syn. Butyrospermum) paradoxa
Seed recalcitrant, vegetative multiplication
Vitex keniensis
Seed supply problems, seed collections in progress
Warburgia salutaris
(E) in parts of range
W. ugandensis
(E) in parts of range
Widdringtonia spp.
Ziziphus mauritiana
Evaluation of seed sources from India desirable
Z. micronata
11. AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
Acacia ampliceps
Salt tolerant
A. aulacocarpa
Potential for tropical lowlands. SO
A. cincinnata
Potential agroforestry species for tropical lowlands
A. colei
Human food (seeds) value under assessment. SO
A. cowleana
Species for tropical lowland sites with poor soils. SO
A. crassicarpa
Biogeographic descriptions, sampling, PVT completed. SO
A. dealbata
Tolerant of drought and frost.
A. decurrens
A. holosericea
PVT. Incl. "A. colei" M.S. SO
A. mangium
Biogeographic descriptions completed, sampling, PVT. Hybrids being developed with A. auriculiformis. SO
A. mearnsii
Int. PVT
A. melanoxylon
A. saligna
Dune fixation.
A. stenopylla
A. tumida
A. victoriae
Albizzia ssp.
PVT. Tolerates saline and high pH
Alphitonia petrei
PVT. Ornamental tree. Difficult to germinate seed, requires boiling
Alstonia scholaris
Araucaria cunninghamii
Int. PVT in progress
Brachychiton populneus
Drought resistant
Calamus spp.
Casuarina cunninghamiana
PVT.
C. equisetifolia
Int. PVT underway
C. glauca
Salt tolerant
C. obesa
Salt tolerant
Elaeocarpus angustifolius
PVT. Susceptible to drought and frost. Good timber for veneer, joinery and furniture
Eucalyptus badjensis
E. benthamii
Restricted natural distribution. (E) in parts of range. Promising in trials
E. camaldulensis
Taxonomic assessment ongoing
E. citriodora
E. cloeziana
E. delegatensis
PVT
E. dunnii
Bulk seed difficult and costly to obtain
E. fastigata
PVT
E. globulus ssp. bicostata
Int. PVT in progress. Tolerates colder and drier conditions than ssp. globulus
E. globulus ssp. globulus
Int. PVT in progress. (E) some provenances
E. globulus ssp. maidenii
Int. PVT in progress. May be superior to ssp. globulus in uniform to summer rainfall areas
E. grandis
PVT.
E. microtheca
Int. PVT in progress. Grows on heavy clay soils
E. nitens
PVT. Bulk seed difficult and costly to obtain
E. occidentalis
Tolerates saline soils and high pH
E. paniculata
E. pellita
Closely related to E. urophylla. Potential for hybridization
E. pilularis
PVT
E. radiata
Some forms high yield of cineole oil
E. robusta
E. saligna
PVT
E. tereticornis
PVT
E. viminalis
PVT
Flindersia maculosa
Tolerant of drought, frost, heavy soils and alkaline pH conditions. Ornamental tree
Grevillea pteridifolia
G. robusta
Leucaena spp.
Agroforestry species
Macadamia spp.
Nuts
Melaleuca cajuputi
M. leucadendra
Tolerant of waterlogged. acid sulphate and saline conditions. Int. PVT
Melia azedarach var. australasica
Paraserianthes procera
Pinus caribaea
P. elliottii
P. oocarpa
P. pinaster
P. radiata (exotic)
(E) in parts of range. Guadalupe Is.
P. tecunumanii
Populus spp.
Pseudotsuga menziesii
PVT
Santalum album
Timber for carving
S. lanceolatum
S. spicatum
Timber for carving
Syzigium paniculatum
Ornamental, bonsai tree. Unsuitable for subtropical areas due to insect attack
Sesbania formosa
Close relative of S. grandiflora
Toona australis
12. PACIFIC ISLANDS
Agathis spp.
Acacia auriculiformis
A. aulacocarpa
A. crassicarpa
A. koa
Timber for carving
A. mangium
Agathis labillardieri
A. robusta
Araucaria cunninghamii
Artocarpus altilis
Calophyllum spp.
Campnosperma brevi
Canarium harveyii
C. indicum
C. solomonensis
Casuarina spp.
Cedrela ordorata (exotic)
Breeding progr.
Ceuthostoma spp.
Cordia subcordata
Timber for carving
Cocos nucifera
Diospyros spp.
Timber for carving
Dracontomelon spp.
Endospermum medullosum
E. deglupta
E. pellita
Gmelina arborea (exotic)
Breeding prog.
Intsia bijuga
Melaleuca spp.
Ocomeles sumatrana
Paraserianthes falcateria
Pinus caribaea
Pometia spp.
Pterocarpus indica
Santalum spp.
Securinega flexuosa
Swietenia macrophylla
Intro. and eval. of prov. from natural range desirable
Tectona grandis (exotic)
Breeding progr.
Terminalia brassii
T. impediens
Toona australis
Problem with borer moth
LEGEND FOR SPECIES LISTS
End uses
1. Industrial wood (logs, sawntimber, construction wood, plywood, chip and particle board, wood pulp etc.)
2. Industrial non-wood products (gums, resin, oils, tannins)
3. Fuelwood, posts, poles (firewood, charcoal, roundwood used on-farm, wood for carving)
4. Other uses, goods and services (food, medicinal use, fodder, land stabilization/ amelioration, shade, shelter, environmental values). Complementary information is, at times given in the "Remarks" column.
Exploration
5. Biological information (natural distribution, taxonomy. genecology, phenology etc.)
6. Collection of germplasm for evaluation
Evaluation
7. In situ (population studies)
8. Ex situ (provenance and progeny tests)
Conservation
9. In situ
10. Ex situ
Germplasm use
11. Semi-bulk/bulk seedlots, reproductive materials
12. Selection and improvement
Remarks
13. Specific uses not obvious from columns 1-4 are mentioned. Also, work in progress is reported in this column. For clarification, reference is sometimes made to a specific country.
PVT = provenance trials
PGT = progeny trials
CLT = clonal trials
SO = seed orchard
(E) = endangered at species or provenance level
MPTS = multi purpose tree species
Rating
For columns 1-4: Ö as appropriate
For columns 5-1 2:
1. Highest priority
2. Prompt action recommended
3. Important, but less urgent than (1) and (2).
