<title>Principles for rational delivery of public and private veterinary services with reference to Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Introduction
Veterinary medicine's primary roots are in agriculture, public health and comparative biology. Raising livestock productivity to enhance food security, improving human health by preventing zoonotic diseases and studying mechanisms of diseases affecting humans and other animals have been unifying themes for organized veterinary medicine with the aim of improving living standards, human-well being and animal welfare. The problem of food insecurity in some countries is partly related to the low productivity of local livestock.
The table below (adapted from FAO, 1996), in which the ratio between the percentage of world total milk (or meat) production and that of world total number of head of dairy cattle (or sheep and goats) is used as a broad measure of productivity, illustrates wide differences in productivity from dairy cattle and from sheep and goats in four regions.
Relative livestock production in four regions (AGROSTAT/FAO data, 1991-1993 averages)
SSA
ASIA
CSA
OECD
Dairy cattle
percent of world total number of head
Dairy cow milk
percent of world total production
Ratio
milk % / dairy cattle %
Sheep and goat stocks
percent of world total number of head
Sheep and goat meat
percent of world total production
Ratio
meat % / sheep and goats
SSA: 44 sub-Saharan African countries; ASIA: 22 Asian countries; CSA: 31 Central and South American countries; OECD: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development countries (see FAO, 1996, p. 48 for specific countries included in each region)
High levels of production are not synonymous with high efficiency. However, the magnitude of differences in expected production compared to the number of animals in a given region suggests that there are significant differences in production efficiency. When the value and maintenance cost of the animals are included as inputs into the system, these costs increase the denominator of the output: input equation and thus reduce efficiency, particularly if output does not rise.
It is not always recognized that there are technical limits to the scale of losses that can be avoided just as there are diminishing returns from increasing expenditures on disease prevention (McInerney, Howe and Schepers, 1992; Ott, Hillberg Seistzinger and Hueston, 1995). For example, in intensive cattle feedlots a more rational (and reduced) use of vaccines and antibiotics, leading to a reduction in total input costs, was a practical method of raising efficiency without jeopardizing animal health (Howard, 1969). Thus, improved delivery and assured access to appropriate livestock goods and services including health, husbandry, management and extension advice, are predicted to improve livestock productivity to more economic levels.
Schreuder et al. (1995) reported beneficial animal health and financial effects resulting from access to a basic animal health service in southern Afghanistan. In districts with access to basic services and remedies compared to districts without, mortality was reduced on an average of 26 percent and 43 percent in young and adult ruminants, respectively. The basic services consisted of readily available clinic-based and part-time field-based auxiliary animal health staff, vaccines, remedies, and curative treatments. The estimated annual net benefits of the programme were in the order of 500 percent of the costs involved and amounted to some US$120600 per district. Furthermore, there are many studies on the losses caused by individual diseases, groups of diseases or disease complexes and the benefits attendant on their control. Recent examples include studies on tsetse and trypanosomiasis control in Ethiopia (Jemal and Hugh-Jones (1995), (Swallow, Mulatu and Leak, 1995); and
the combination of different tick control strategies with immunization against Theileria parva in Zimbabwe (Peagram et al., 1996) and Kenya (Mukhebi et al., 1995). In semi-arid areas of the Rift Valley in Kenya, Gatongi et al. (1997) demonstrated that deworming mixed sheep and goats flocks (and their offspring) prior to the-onset of rains was equal to or significantly better, in terms of performance measures, when compared to flocks dewormed during the rains. Deworming compared to controls increased performance in almost all performance measures and decreased mortality. All of the above studies document significant loss reductions and/or net financial benefits attributable to specific animal health interventions.
In recent years countries throughout the world have started to implement structural adjustment programmes to refocus government services and improve efficiency. In Africa where agriculture and livestock are so vital to the national economy in many countries, animal health and the delivery of veterinary services have been particularly important components of this process.
Against this background and following a worldwide electronic conference on the subject, an FAO Technical Consultation (held in Rome from 25 to 27 March 1997) and involving national veterinary officers from five sub-Saharan African countries, representatives of funding agencies, international organizations and expert consultants, debated, revised and approved changes to a draft document entitled Principles for rational delivery of public and private veterinary services with reference to Africa together with an annex entitled Negotiating framework for rationalizing delivery of public and private veterinary services.
This, the revised document, is now published and it is hoped that the agreed economic, professional, technical and sociological principles will be used by government officials, public and private sector veterinarians, private industry, consultants, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and international development agencies as a guide and framework to change, strengthen and develop the rational delivery of veterinary services within each country as required.
<section>2</section>
2. Essential components for rational delivery of veterinary services
Successful delivery of veterinary services in their broadest sense, which largely takes into account the pressures exerted by major stakeholders, has evolved in many countries to include five essential components. These are (i) livestock producers and their organizations; (ii) a national public veterinary service; (iii) a private veterinary sector; (iv) a statutory regulatory body; and (v) a veterinary professional association. Each component has different responsibilities and may represent different stakeholders. Ideally the five components interact with checks and balances so that all clients are fairly represented. The logic and rationale for the creation of each component, as well as assigning specific tasks and responsibilities, are based on economic, biological and social principles. One objective of this paper is to define those principles that provide a technical framework for rationalizing the delivery of veterinary services.
<section>3</section>
3. Public sector veterinary services
Division of responsibilities
Operational effectiveness
Strategy for restructuring
Strategy for divestment of commercial tasks
Management of privatization
Management structure
Strategy for the transition
Publicly funded veterinary services are expected to be responsible for providing services (i) where no free-market incentive justifies (or creates demand for) a service, e.g. public health; (ii) where there is a free-market incentive but there are economies of scale, externalities, or professional or biological determinants that dictate how best to deliver specific services, e.g. disease eradication by area-wide vaccination; or (iii) when services are provided based on the collective assent of the governed as to the need for specific services and how much the public is willing to pay (be taxed) for them, e.g. quality control of biologicals. Where these principles do not apply, selected services can be legitimately divested to the private sector.
Public sector veterinary services also direct their activities in accordance with national development policies for investment; equity of opportunity; poverty alleviation; food security; environmental protection; full employment; support for vulnerable groups; sustainable agriculture production; and other socially desirable goals. Should veterinary functions in support of national development policies not be fully commercially viable, many governments have chosen to subsidize their delivery.
One crucial question when investment in animal health services is considered is who benefits and who pays, e.g. will those who make the investments reap the benefits or will others? However, national governments will always have to carry the overall burden of maintaining the health of the national herd.
Division of responsibilities
Numerous fore and publications (Cheneau, 1985; CTA, 1985a,b; FAO/RNEA, 1994; FAO/RLAC, 1992; OIE, 1995; Umali, Feder and de Haan, 1992; Schillhorn van Veen and de Haan, 1995; Leonard, 1987, 1993), have considered the distribution of the different animal health functions performed by the public and private sectors. A list of services, derived from these and other publications, was considered and modified at the Technical Consultation held by FAO in March 1997. This list (which is not exhaustive), presented below, is intended as a guide for consideration by governments; it gives functions that could be considered as falling under the responsibility of the private sector, remain under the responsibility of the public sector, or are candidates for shared responsibility and shared execution. The consultation recognized the primary responsibility of the livestock producer for the health of his/her animals; that the process of structural adjustment is a dynamic one involving
transitional periods; and that all countries are different in their manner and stage of implementation.
The criteria for assigning functions to the responsibility of one or the other of the two bodies were economic theory; technical judgement by national veterinary authorities; tradition; and prevailing sociocultural conditions within the various countries.
Services under the responsibility of but not necessarily executed by the public sector: ensuring the health of the national herd including disease surveillance, compliance monitoring, quarantine, quality control of remedies and vaccines, planning for emergencies and reporting to international bodies and neighbouring countries; oversight of food safety, import and export inspection and certification according to international standards; regulation, monitoring and support of other partners in the animal health care system; accreditation of personnel; creation of an enabling environment for the private sector; and general formulation of livestock development policy.
Functions under shared responsibilities: disease diagnosis and reporting; compulsory testing; accreditation; tick and tsetse control; food hygiene and inspection; continuing education and training; diagnostic support; animal welfare; notifiable disease control; disease emergency response; zoonosis control; research; and advice and extension.
Services under the responsibility of the private sector: clinical diagnosis and treatment; production and distribution of remedies and vaccines; artificial insemination; management of herd health and production programmes; marketing livestock and products; and others.
Public veterinary services are generally targeted towards identifiable clients (Ashley, Holden & Bazeley, 1996), but the clients vary according to country. Chief veterinary officers (CVOs) in European countries tend to view the urban public and food processing industry as their main clients for regulatory and quality control services that protect public health, guarantee quality and avoid fraud. In African countries, CVOs see the smallholder livestock owner as their primary client with the aim of preventing losses from disease. In sub-Saharan African countries where livestock productivity is low (see Table) it is evident that either additional services are required or a more rational delivery system needs to be found, or both, in order to raise productivity.
Operational effectiveness
Times change. In many African countries there is now an abundance of trained animal health professionals and paraprofessionals. However, focusing on the wrong priorities, undertaking the wrong tasks, and decreasing government operational budgets all limit the ability of public sector veterinary services to deliver services appropriately. Effective management under these financial constraints has often been found lacking.
Macro-economic structural adjustment plans are being implemented by numerous countries in order to curtail domestic government spending, reduce national debt and control inflation. Restructuring of public veterinary services may sooner or later be the inevitable result of economic reforms. One major intention of restructuring is to allocate costs where benefits are expected, e.g. increased production is to be paid for by the livestock owners while overall environmental and public health aspects remain under government responsibility.
Livestock owners in some developing countries have recent memory of receiving a wide range of nominally free veterinary services. However, in most cases where goods and services must be paid for, livestock owners are readily persuaded to do so provided that these are consistently available, genuinely wanted, and perceived to be beneficial to the health of the animals and thus to enhancing the livestock owners' welfare.
A government's operational capacity and effectiveness can be improved by rationalizing the delivery of public good veterinary services while divesting those services that can be commercialized and that benefit individual owners of livestock. The overall aim is delivery of efficient and effective animal health services, with three parties directly involved, namely: livestock owners and their animals, private animal health care providers, and government agencies. A fourth group consisting of the consumers for whose benefit animals are kept and their products marketed is indirectly involved. From the consumer's point of view, it is imperative that the concerted efforts of the three other parties result in sufficient output of good quality products at reasonable prices. One way to achieve this is by focusing on what each party is best able to contribute, i.e. livestock owners raising livestock; health care providers delivering appropriate services; and government agencies
securing overall stability through regulation, monitoring and the provision of an enabling environment.
Strategy for restructuring
Restructuring and divestment free up funds for operations. Managers of public veterinary services need to evaluate all tasks in order to (i) determine which tasks can be commercialized or made contestable; (ii) solicit potential providers of these commercial, contestable tasks; (iii) reconcile items (i) and (ii) with professional technical judgement and experience; and (iv) divest those tasks that pass the filter of not being essentially in the public good, or recognized as being non-contestable at that moment.
The public veterinary services must recognize the shift to a regulatory and a monitoring role implicit in the divestment of selected services to the private sector and in trends towards devolution. New roles will necessitate a new mix of skills among staff. In some cases a veterinary medical degree may not be required (such as for information management, laboratory testing, public relations). Alternatively, a veterinary degree is necessary as a first step towards technical specialization (toxicology, epidemiology, and so on). Opportunities for retraining are clearly needed. Salaries commensurate with the redefined responsibilities, enhanced skills, and to ensure integrity may be required to retain highly trained (and retrained) skilled staff. The new professional philosophy is that the public veterinary service needs to:
(i) focus on monitoring delivery of commercialized tasks to ensure that the public interest is fairly served, thus calling for a skilled, well-paid, non-corruptible civil service able to take on a regulatory role to ensure quality;
(ii) market and deliver effectively specific professional services generally recognized as non-contestable public goods, but for which the consent of the governed is continually required;
(iii) deliver high-quality and effective services and foster good public relations in order to maintain public support and funding;
(iv) provide effective in-service training for new public veterinary service staff and for those whose work is reoriented to ensure their ability to deliver effective services to the public;
(v) encourage veterinary professional associations to take on additional responsibilities for the continuing education of members and for promoting codes of ethics; and
(vi) establish an independent statutory body (veterinary registrar, council or board) that fairly represents the interests of all stakeholders, including consumers.
Strategy for divestment of commercial tasks
Commercialized tasks can be identified as those where the public veterinary service already charges fees, either officially or unofficially. Such tasks may include mandatory vaccinations; clinical services for farm animals or pets; surgery; clinical diagnosis and treatment; laboratory disease diagnosis; breed improvement advice; artificial insemination; pregnancy diagnosis; and advice on feeding strategy or health maintenance. Additionally, liberalized procurement and distribution of remedies, vaccines, chemicals and equipment need to accompany divestment in order to give the private sector greater and assured access to inputs.
The identification of functions or tasks already enjoying a high degree of commercialization, e.g. clinical diagnosis and treatment, leads to a consideration of their potential economic viability when implemented by the private sector. Further steps in the process are to carry out a macro-economic assessment of the public versus the private good nature of each task; identify potential economies of scale in delivering the task; look for the presence of externalities; and benefit from the experience of other countries to classify tasks further as candidates for divestment to the private sector.
Sound professional technical judgement based on biological characteristics of diseases, epidemiology and sound management must be used to reconcile candidate tasks with commercial potential. Knowledge and experience of disease agents and their control (the technology), model veterinary professional associations, principles of management and the sociocultural context in each country should be carefully assessed in the evaluation of candidate tasks for divestment. If such care is not taken, veterinarians are in danger of losing the privileged position historically afforded to the professions.
Chief veterinary officers or a restructuring (transition) team can publicize a roster of tasks and assets to be divested or privatized in order to attract interested bidders. Accounting information for enterprises, including a breakdown of costs and gross revenues, indebtedness, plus the terms of management, lease or sale, will have to be prepared and publicized (Babjee, 1996; Baker, 1995). The cycle is repeated until only the essential, non-contestable tasks remain with the public veterinary service. Contestable tasks are divested for implementation by private sector entities. Tasks identified as shared responsibility (see Division of responsibilities, p. 3) can be contracted out to the private sector under public monitoring and supervision.
Management of privatization
Funding agencies, advisers, and international organizations need to support the change in the role of the public as well as the private veterinary services during the transition process. In most respects, privatization should be seen as a process that refocuses government veterinary activities on achieving better services for the public and not necessarily as a vehicle for reducing the real magnitude of government expenditures and responsibilities.
In principle, veterinary tasks delivered by the private sector will be justified and offered when (i) financial conditions permit; (ii) enabling legislation reduces apprehension by would-be entrants; (iii) competition by the public sector is removed; and (iv) capital is available for new investors. The first three items are directly under the control of the government and require enlightened management by the public veterinary service, the transition team and concerned government bureaus, such as legal advisers. Capital (item iv) may be available as government loans, government-backed bank loans or private capital. Freezing the automatic hiring of all veterinary graduates gives a potent stimulus for the emergence of private veterinary practices (Wamukoya, Gathuma and Mutiga, 1995) while removal of unfair competition by the public sector is crucial to their early viability (Ilemobade, 1996; Wamukoya, Gathuma and Mutiga, 1995).
In areas with high potential for livestock production, for pet or mixed animal practice, or for development of private industry, private sector justified tasks can spontaneously be assumed under a market-driven system (Wamukoya, Gathuma and Mutiga, 1995). Special attention needs to be directed towards the provision of veterinary services in marginal areas where livestock producers are frequently among the nation's poorest. In such areas, purely commercial private goods and services may not be readily accessible and both private and public sector services may need to be subsidized if they are to be made available. However, private practitioners may offer better concrete (as opposed to theoretical) access to animal health services even in these conditions, but such an outcome depends critically on the way in which privatization is implemented.
Public sector responsibilities, e.g. disease surveillance and reporting, are no less required in marginal areas and can be carried out effectively through the use of contracts with veterinarians, animal health assistants (AHAs), animal health technicians (AHTs), and auxiliaries for their delivery. Simple contracts to undertake given tasks, such as vaccination of x number of animals, y number of hours of abattoir inspection per week (Fassi-Fehri and Bakkoury, 1995), can be awarded, thus making essential services available while enhancing the financial viability of private practice in low-potential areas. Numerous examples of pure subsidies (Quebec, Scotland, Sweden), incentives (Morocco, western Canada) or public service contracts (Morocco, Afghanistan) can serve as guidelines. Effective delivery of goods and services in low potential areas presents managerial and public relations challenges to CVOs. Funding agency support and guidance would be useful for continued
experimentation and evaluation of delivery schemes, infrastructure development and in-service training.
The judicious provision and use of credit by the private sector requires careful planning. Examples (New Zealand, Kenya, Mali) of prudent personal financial planning strongly suggest that taking on a heavy debt burden in order to launch a private veterinary practice is unnecessary and even contra-indicated. Normal banking controls and time will determine the prudence of recent donor-funded credit schemes for stimulating private practice establishment in African countries. The use of informal loans, credit from pharmaceutical distributors and personal assets all appear to provide viable alternatives to formal bank credit. Experience to date suggests that government decision-makers need not be too concerned with the availability of credit provided overall enabling policies are in place.
Management structure
Efficient control of disease outbreaks depends on the ability of local and national veterinary authorities to receive information on animal diseases quickly and to take immediate action in response. The risk for critical delay of disease notification is increased when public veterinary service staff are not a part of the line management structure, particularly where there is decentralization and animal health responsibilities are mixed with animal production and extension functions, or where reporting in the field goes through a non-veterinarian. Especially when veterinary systems are devolved to subnational governmental units or are privatized, the reporting of notifiable diseases needs to be a statutory and ethical responsibility of all animal health care practitioners.
Likewise, CVOs need assured access to the Minister of Agriculture or Permanent Secretary, or their equivalent, in order to obtain political support and funds with which to respond in emergency situations. Emergency preparedness, including legislation, access to funds, availability of human and other resources, and an action plan, are essential in the control or eradication of major epizootic diseases. National resources for emergencies are especially important for securing collaboration from local government authorities and private practitioners. Direct access to politically responsible authorities greatly enhances the two-way communication with officials who provide information directly to the public. Public support is always needed for carrying out disease control measures which can be difficult, disruptive and financially disastrous for livestock owners. Rapid access to information from the field is essential for informing the public.
Strategy for the transition
The overall objective of restructuring of veterinary services should be to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of animal health care delivery and, consequently, livestock productivity; safeguard public health; and contribute to national development. The end result should be (i) a public veterinary service better able to carry out its redefined responsibilities; (ii) a functioning private sector; and (iii) the necessary supporting personnel and infrastructure able to contribute to the overall objective.
The institution of a special transition team to plan and oversee the implementation of any restructuring process has been found useful. This team should be guided by an advisory council with stakeholder representatives including members appointed from the national veterinary service; the national treasury; the pharmaceutical industry; livestock producer groups; and consumer groups. Advice should be sought from countries that have successfully gone through a similar transition process. Should external funding be envisaged, representatives of funding agencies may be invited to be members of the restructuring council. An agreed negotiating framework (see Annex 2) may be used as a guideline for discussions and review of the restructuring process.
The Principles for rational delivery of public and private veterinary services with reference to Africa are recommended as a guide for restructuring and should be publicly debated. The principles will be based on economic theory and current biological understanding, and take into account sociocultural conditions prevailing in each country. Likewise, experiences of other countries with similar conditions need to be considered.
Stakeholders should be informed of the outcome of deliberations for the sake of transparency and be consulted frequently for their input. Experience shows that only when there is free flow of information and consultation as well as participation of stakeholder representatives can a workable agreement for change be reached (Till, 1995).
<section>4</section>
4. Private veterinary sector
Enabling private sector development
Contracts with government
Oversight
Delivery of veterinary services not specifically under the responsibility of the public sector should, by default, reside with the private sector. Nonetheless, the relationship between the two sectors is dynamic and mutually supportive. Private practitioners may be contracted to execute tasks under the responsibility of the public sector and the latter should enable the full development of private practice.
The private veterinary sector's raison d'être is to deliver preventive, curative and promotive services that largely benefit individual animals and their owners, i.e. to deliver private goods and services (Leonard, 1987). This means that a private practice veterinarian should debit (commercialize) livestock owners' the full cost of examination and diagnosis, medicines, economically motivated preventive vaccinations, surgery, husbandry advice, and other services provided, together with his or her time and transportation costs.
Enabling private sector development
In general the private sector thrives best in environments without government interference. However, governments can help by creating and ascertaining conditions and regulations that support private initiative and private sector operation. As such it is important to obtain input from the private sector, whether producers, processors, consumers or veterinarians in the process of policy formulation and drafting of quality control regulations.
Subject to the prevailing code of laws (as implemented by the veterinary registration body), the private sector should not be obstructed but encouraged to provide new services as technological change presents opportunities; as consumer demand evolves; as consumer willingness to pay for services increases; and as the oversight authority of government bodies permits. In the abridged words of Umali and Schwartz (1994), encouraging private sector participation implies promoting private sector investment. The prevailing economic, cultural, social and political character of the economy will determine the optimal programme for the privatization process. What is clear is that the private sector will invest only if a favourable economic environment prevails and barriers to entry are eliminated. This requires macroeconomic stability, essential infrastructure, changes to the regulatory framework, and a functioning legal system. One commonly recognized barrier to entry of private
veterinary practitioners has been (and still is in some countries) the delivery of recognized private sector responsibilities and functions (see Division of responsibilities, p. 3) by the official veterinary service. Unfair competition needs to cease before private practitioners will risk establishing their practices. These are the "public goods" that governments have to provide.
Contracts with government
Private practitioners, NGOs and membership organizations, acting with registered veterinarians and other animal health care providers, could be readily contracted and paid by government agencies for activities related to the long-range maintenance of the national herds' health as well as the public health situation in the country, i.e. contracted to deliver selected public goods and services. Public contracts may also be used to expand the extension role played by private practitioners beyond their normal provision of husbandry advice. It is well to remember that the public character of goods or services does not imply that the body providing them must be public. There are many examples (brucellosis vaccination and testing, vaccination against foot-and-mouth disease, tuberculosis testing, etc.) where public veterinary services employ private agents to deliver selected functions or tasks.
Oversight
The private sector delivery of selected services is subject to compliance monitoring by national government agencies, ethical standards agreed upon by the professional veterinary association, disciplinary measures from the registration body and civil authorities, and competition in the market place. Consumers may be represented on statutory registration bodies (see Statutory registration body, p. 12), in hearings on the introduction of proposed regulations, and in debates on the use of public funds.
<section>5</section>
5. The veterinary profession
Enabling legislation
Statutory registration body
Veterinary professional associations
A profession is defined by the combination of its advanced technical training, adherence to publicly oriented ethics, and some degree of autonomy such that members look at least partly to their peers for approval and advancement. The welfare of a profession is in a symbiotic relationship with the public interest.
Enabling legislation
It is self-evident that clear enabling legislation is required for public veterinary authorities to carry out their regulatory responsibilities. Likewise, legislation allowing for the charter of veterinary professional associations (national and local), establishing registration bodies, and allowing the existence of private veterinary practice are central to the rational delivery of veterinary services. National legislation should not only allow a private sector but should include ancillary commercial and civil laws actually enhancing its establishment.
Enabling legislation is essential for empowering veterinary authorities to control movement of animals and confiscate or destroy animals or products derived from them in connection with disease control or eradication activities. Where such enabling legislation does not exist, it must be established in order for public authorities to apply fully the biological principles underlying infectious disease control. Where legislation needs to be updated to conform to current technology or to international trade regulations such as those of the International Office of Epizootics (OIE) and the World Trade Organization, this needs to be done. Legislation on the registration and quality control of veterinary drugs should conform to the recommendations for international regulations, e.g. OIE standards and recommendations.
National legislation pertaining to private sector participation in delivering specific services may well need updating in light of current trends. Particularly ripe for legislative review are various "gentlemen's agreements" which only loosely define the locations and clients where private practitioners and public-employed veterinarians share responsibilities for delivering what are accepted as private sector duties, such as clinical examination, diagnosis and treatment.
Enabling national legislation needs to define legally veterinary and other animal health care practices; to state academic and other qualifications required before registration; and to define the powers of the statutory body. At least the following functions need to be assigned to some combination of legally sanctioned bodies:
(i) examination and certification of new veterinary graduates, immigrant veterinarians and other new entrants to ensure compliance with the statutory acts;
(ii) registration of veterinarians and other animal health care providers indicating the levels of responsibility with which each category may legally be entrusted;
(iii) protection of consumers from unlawful acts by registered animal health care providers;
(iv) generally policing the activities of registered veterinarians and other health care providers to ensure that they act in accordance with laws relating to the practice of veterinary medicine;
(v) prosecuting non-registered persons who allegedly break the statutes; and
(vi) determining those remedies and vaccines that can be sold and dispensed by each class of animal health care practitioners.
Disciplinary measures may have considerable financial and personal effects and can range from temporary suspension of the licensee to practice, fines, compulsory retraining, expulsion from registration or imprisonment. This range of censure allows statutory bodies and civil authorities to uphold technical standards of the profession while wielding a potentially heavy hand when consumer's are defrauded or injured.
Statutory registration body
A statutory body for examining, certifying, registering and disciplining those providing animal health care services is a necessary means both to uphold technical standards of the profession and to protect consumers. Thus, this statutory body, usually referred to as the Veterinary Board or Council (Ordre or Corporation Vétérinaire in French; Conselho Federal or Regionais de Medicina Veterinàrian in Portuguese; Consejo Federal de Medicina Veterinaria in Spanish) should be independent of direct control by the national veterinary service, the CVO or the professional veterinary association, while retaining the technical and ethical values of the profession.
Local and/or national certification as to minimal technical competence signifies that registrants are sufficiently familiar with the core body of veterinary knowledge, plus any particular local conditions, to be expected to deliver quality services. Additionally, internationally recognized registration of veterinarians (the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons and reciprocal licensing agreements) imposes academic guidelines for training at veterinary faculties worldwide. In most countries both private and public sector veterinarians are expected to be certified and registered by the national registration body. It follows that the non-veterinary participants in the animal health care system should also be subjected to certification as to their minimum technical competence to deliver quality services appropriate to their training.
Veterinary professional associations
Professional associations enjoy a privileged place in many societies because of the members' higher education and adherence to a code of ethics. Their activities are, however, monitored by legal authorities to ensure that the association or its members avoid abuse of the public trust.
Where national veterinary professional associations do not exist, they need to be established as a necessary pressure group for rational delivery of veterinary services and as a vehicle for continuing education and professional improvement. National veterinary associations can take a credible advocacy role for the public interest. Governments and economies cannot operate well nor develop fully without the input of the collective contribution of the veterinary profession. As members with internationally recognized qualifications, veterinarians are relatively more mobile in seeking employment in other countries. This professionalism helps to shield veterinarians as a group, as well as individually, from inappropriate political pressure. They therefore can take risks, as a group, both to promote the interest of their clients and to promote the interests of the profession generally.
There are two sides to the coin, however. Veterinarians often take the brunt of personal abuse to implement government-mandated disease control programmes that are unpopular with livestock owners, such as the slaughter of overtly healthy but potentially diseased animals. Veterinary professional associations support unpopular programmes because they are ultimately in the public interest or necessary for national development. Peer support has been critical for public health and development in numerous situations, both in developed and developing countries.
Veterinary associations serve as a forum for communication based on common socialization between public service veterinarians and their peers in private practice and industry. Meetings of the national association provide the occasion for discussion among the various interest groups. Likewise, the veterinary professional association can formulate a common stand on issues affecting the association's members but which also have wider public interest. Finally, the professional association has a critical role to play in maintaining and upgrading the technical competence of its members through continuing education.
The above benefits of associations do not apply to veterinarians alone. Animal health assistants, technicians and auxiliaries are also vital members of the animal health care delivery system. They need to be included in the veterinary association or to form their own associations in close collaboration with veterinarians.
<section>6</section>
6. Special issues
Rationalizing the public veterinary service
Public sector financing and employee incomes
Veterinary services delivery by non-veterinarians: animal health assistants (AHAs), animal health technicians (AHTs), auxiliaries and livestock owners
Services in low-potential, marginal areas
Liberalization of veterinary input supply
Membership organizations (MOs) as deliverers of veterinary services
Cost recovery
Balance of animal health education with national needs
Rationalizing the public veterinary service
The government and its public veterinary service may alter their recruitment policies either to employ sufficient new staff with the necessary skills, or to provide training so as to meet the requirements of the newly rationalized public veterinary service. The automatic hiring of all new veterinary graduates needs to cease, as happened in Kenya in 1988 (Wamukoya, Gathuma and Mutiga, 1995), Senegal and Mali. Staff recruiting should be in accordance with the needs for annual replacement both in numbers and skills required.
Wise management, sufficient time, judicious transfer to reorganized posts and enhanced cost recovery may counter the need to make current employees redundant. Should staff need to be reduced, this may be accomplished through a combination of natural attrition, early retirement incentives, retraining, or forced redundancy. Encouragement of the private sector should lead to employment growth in industry, private practice, consultation, marketing of agricultural products and primary livestock production, thus creating employment opportunities for staff made redundant.
Redundant employees should have opportunities for retraining to develop skills required for private sector employment, whether in clinical veterinary practice, with industries or even with non-veterinary medicine-related employment. Awarding government contracts by tender to private practitioners to undertake public or shared responsibilities serves as an inducement to leave government service and offers a potential remuneration, while assuring that essential services are performed (Fassi-Fehri and Bakkoury, 1995). Agreed early retirement plans with compensation can be made attractive to public sector veterinary staff. Re-employment and retirement policies should be consistent with the overall government employment-related policies and laws. International institutions and donors could support programmes for downsizing of the public sector where this is an option.
Public sector financing and employee incomes
It is generally recognized, on the basis of various profiles and recommendations, that the target percentage for personnel costs should be between 40-50 percent of the total public veterinary service budget, thus allowing for an adequate operational budget (Cheneau, 1985; Umali, Feder and de Haan, 1992). Furthermore, if the income of public sector veterinarians is significantly below the cost of living for comparable professionals, there will be severe strain on the integrity with which they perform their regulatory functions. It is critical to address these issues in the restructuring process.
With public veterinary service staff adequately compensated, a non-competition policy with the private sector can be strictly enforced. Persistent unauthorized delivery of commercialized, privatized services by government employees should result in disciplinary action, leading ultimately to dismissal. Should commercialized services be so lucrative, there is no reason why they should not be delivered by the private sector.
Veterinary services delivery by non-veterinarians: animal health assistants (AHAs), animal health technicians (AHTs), auxiliaries and livestock owners
This is a highly contentious issue requiring consensus within the veterinary profession and with stakeholders. An agreed plan is needed that focuses on a practical method to employ these persons in a productive manner and at the same time protect the public from substandard service.
Livestock owners have a major role in animal health which is not always fully appreciated. They are relied upon to report diseases to local veterinary personnel, public and private. In many countries livestock owners treat and vaccinate their own animals legally with nonprescription drugs and vaccines. The reason for this is that owners have the legal right to do as they wish with their own property, within limits imposed by local legislation and cost efficiency. For treatment and vaccination by lay-persons to be tolerated, risks to the public need to be minimized and animal welfare maximized. This can only be accomplished through education and compliance monitoring.
The vital and economically viable services that AHAB, AHTs and auxiliary personnel perform in marginal areas, particularly in low-input low-output livestock systems, and/or with low value livestock species need to be recognized. Community-based primary animal health care workers have an important niche in the delivery of services in developing countries.
There is a need to define clearly the tasks permitted to various cadres of the animal health team; the remedies and vaccines they are permitted to administer and the procedures and tests they are allowed to carry out. Different decisions about these issues will be dictated by the ecological and economic conditions the livestock production system of each country. In making these decisions, however, the countries establishing regulations need to ensure that producers who desire economic animal health interventions are able to obtain them; that the long-term quality needs of producers are being secured; and that problems with the abuse of remedies are avoided. In all cases, the economic welfare of both the animal health cadre and the producers forms a legitimate basis for decision-making.
Under any circumstances, the effectiveness of animal health assistants, technicians and auxiliaries will be enhanced if they are incorporated within structures that provide technical advice, support and guidance from veterinarians. An example of animal health auxiliaries (village relais) being successfully incorporated into the national veterinary services is in Burkina Faso. Auxiliary-level persons were trained under a project to administer Newcastle disease vaccine and were subsequently incorporated with the national veterinary service.
Services in low-potential, marginal areas
Mounting experience indicates that AHAB, AHTs and auxiliary personnel are more dependable in delivering veterinary services in marginal, low-potential areas than the public veterinary services or private sector veterinarians. Where the economic value of individual animals is low, owners will i) accept a certain level of loss before agreeing to pay for veterinary services; ii) become skilled in diagnosing and treating their own animals; iii) demand access to veterinary remedies and vaccines with which, often on the advice of a veterinarian, to treat their own animals; and iv) request skilled diagnostic advice, often from post mortem and laboratory methods (Baker, 1995). They offer an affordable alternative to deliver selected services, even on a commercialized basis and are often highly motivated. In many countries (such as Bangladesh) women are the primary providers of basic animal health services in communities.
The public veterinary service still has responsibilities for implementing public service mandates in the marginal, low-potential regions. To exercise these responsibilities, methods of delivery through other providers or outright subsidies need to be implemented. Policy-makers in the public veterinary services need to examine how NGOs, membership organizations, communities or the private sector are providing goods and services in other countries and benefit from lessons learned.
A delivery programme needs to be designed that meets the client's needs in an economical manner and still carries out government responsibilities. Numerous examples are presented in a forthcoming FAO policies and strategies document (in preparation).
Liberalization of veterinary input supply
Nearly all veterinary related activities are highly dependent on a regular and assured availability of quality inputs (FAO, 1994). In many African countries, input procurement and distribution have been a monopoly of the government veterinary services. With the restriction of operational budgets, both procurement and distribution have been limited. This situation has given rise to implementation of cost recovery and revolving funds for both private and public goods and services. These programmes, implemented within the government veterinary services, have met with varying success in terms of equity, sustainability and motivation of public service veterinarians to meet the palpable demands of their public employer versus those of their producer-client.
An alternative approach is to liberalize procurement and distribution of inputs through the private sector (Cheneau, 1984). Pharmaceutical distributors have generally responded favourably to input liberalization by supporting veterinarians and/or pharmacists to provide remedies, chemicals, equipment and some vaccines to the public. Experience to date indicates that sales of quality inputs by private providers have increased while availability of black market inputs have declined (de Haan and Bekure, 1991; Angniman, 1996).
Commercialized procurement and delivery of veterinary inputs by the private sector have generally made these goods more available, avoided some of the problems associated with government monopolies and revolving funds, and proved robust in times of civil disorder. There is, however, a clear need for the public veterinary service to exercise its responsibility for quality certification of inputs, for restricting use of dangerous remedies and chemicals to qualified providers, and for pharmaco-surveillance of the efficacy of remedies and vaccines.
If nothing else, the transition period affords an opportunity to repeal archaic laws that prohibit or restrain liberalization of veterinary remedies trade, cost recovery and other free-market activities. At the same time, laws need to protect the consumer from fraud and abuse.
Membership organizations (MOs) as deliverers of veterinary services
Membership organizations provide common benefits to members and are financed and managed by the persons they serve. Membership organizations reside within the private sector (Holder, Ashley and Bazeley, 1996) but are sometimes referred to as the third sector. They range in scope from grassroots community groups to associations of those with specialized interests such as dairy cooperatives. Numerous examples demonstrate that MOs are most capable of employing veterinarians and other animal health care providers to deliver private good livestock services. The membership organization's veterinary service providers have been contracted to provide some services of a public good nature (e.g. compulsory vaccinations, research and extension) in the same was as private practice veterinarians.
These organizations may assume some of the roles of the public sector, particularly in controlling diseases with externalities (foot-and-mouth disease, tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis) or quality control of livestock products (freedom of milk from antibiotic residues). Membership organizations, by virtue of their structure, may offer economies of scale for delivering public, private or shared responsibility services; they develop an acceptable mechanism to share the costs and benefits of purely public goods; and they are likely to ensure that tailor-made services demanded by their members are accessible.
Membership organizations and NGOs may represent unique opportunities to deliver a broad spectrum of services, particularly under conditions of budget restrictions and inadequate delivery of services by government and private practitioners (Schillhorn van Veen and de Haan, 1995; Mehraban, Barker and Ward, 1996; Sidahmed, 1995). Nonetheless the state should retain ultimate responsibility for oversight of those functions designated as public (see Division of responsibilities, p. 3) and should delegate only their execution.
Cost recovery
Cost recovery is the concept of "user-paid" fees for specific services that are acquired from the public veterinary services, by virtue of its professional responsibility, but that also financially benefit the owner of livestock or products. Cost recovery can be applied even where there are some positive externalities.
In theory, purely public goods such as public health should be financed by the national treasury or by an obligatory user fee (tax) on those who benefit. Where both the public and an identifiable private owner benefit, the cost needs to be apportioned. This is the economic basis for cost recovery for such services as vaccination for notifiable (gazetted) diseases, meat inspection for interstate commerce, and for herd disease status certification.
An example is the mandated hygiene inspection of meat shipped across state borders or internationally. Inspection and occasional condemnation of livestock are a nuisance and a cost to the livestock producer, meat-packing industry and the consumer. At the same time certified government inspected and passed meat is more marketable and hence more valuable than meat that has been inspected. As inspection is both a burden and an asset, some or all of the costs can be recovered as user fees from the industry. These are legitimate costs of doing business that may be passed along to the consumer.
Experience indicates that cost recovery sensitizes the public to the inevitable need to pay for some goods and services, thus paving the way towards acceptance of full commercialization. Within the government services, cost recovery is a pragmatic, but hopefully temporary, way to supplement inadequate personnel and operational budgets in some countries.
It frequently is desirable to place the revenues from user fees into revolving funds to assure that sufficient will be available for the services to be provided. Revolving funds should be managed by the immediate users (public, private or both). This provides incentive and motivation to both providers and payers of services (Sidahmed, 1995).
Revolving funds should not reduce the state's responsibility to pay for services that are of a public good nature. It is possible and sometimes desirable that revolving funds be excluded from the government budget, where they will be free from treasury or International Monetary Fund restrictions. Such funds can then be a prelude to privatization, particularly when they are managed by end-users at the local level.
Balance of animal health education with national needs
A reasonable numerical balance of graduates between annual output and needs eliminates some pressures when restructuring veterinary services. It is extremely difficult, nonetheless, to estimate this balance largely because an equitable balance varies according to the perception of the various stakeholders. Clear deficits may be made up in a matter of months, by importing veterinarians from countries with a surplus, or within a few years through educating animal health assistants via the veterinary science curriculum. Excesses are a glut on the market and rather more difficult for national economies to absorb.
Rational utilization of veterinary expertise has a marked effect on the perceived number of graduates required. Published norms for the number of veterinarians or auxiliary personnel per thousand tropical livestock units do not make much sense if scant operational budgets restrict purchase of fuel for transportation or fees for services are so high as to preclude affordable care. The public is not well served by major deviations from balance. With too few providers, services may not be available or are too expensive for large sections of society, while too many providers are expensive for governments to train and employ and cause highly competent private practitioners to be undercompensated. Likewise, competent practitioners cannot survive long term as they may not earn sufficient fees to be able to invest in new equipment and acquire skills provided by further education.
Overcapacity to produce veterinarians may be avoided through regional veterinary schools. Here the combined needs of several countries can be produced in one veterinary faculty that supports a critical mass of expertise offering quality education. A regional veterinary school, by definition, leads to a "harmonized curriculum" that in turn allows for reciprocal registration of graduates among the countries. In addition to the cost savings in eliminating excess veterinary schools, reciprocal registration increases mobility and opportunities for veterinarians to fill gaps in demand. Where excess educational capacity already exists, faculties may exploit opportunities for providing continuing education, short-course refresher training, in-service training to meet governmental needs; or vocational courses for animal health assistants and auxiliary personnel.
Likewise, the training of auxiliary personnel needs to be approached cautiously. Auxiliaries must survive in the private sector (McCorkle and Mathias, 1996) subject to market forces, often in marginal livestock areas. They need sufficient skills to provide reliable, needed and cost-effective services but are constrained by excessive costs incurred by long-distance travel and the low density of livestock populations. A proper balance needs to match the supply of auxiliary personnel with expected demand. The concept that auxiliary personnel in reality are primarily livestock owners or farmers and only provide animal health or husbandry services part-time has proved successful in the Central African Republic, northeast Thailand and Afghanistan.
<section>7</section>
Bibliography
Angniman, P.A. 1996. Privatization of veterinary services within the context of structural adjustment in Mali, Cameroon and Chad. Rome, FAO.
Ashley, S.D., Holden, S.J. & Bazeley, P.B.S. 1996. The changing role of veterinary services: a report of a survey of chief veterinary officers' opinions. Somerset, UK, Livestock in Development.
Babjee, A.M. 1996. Privatization with reference to the veterinary services in Malaysia. Paper presented at the FAO/GTZ Workshop on Systematic Improvement of the Efficiency of Public and Private Livestock Services in Asia, 22-26 April 1996, Bangkok, Thailand.
Baker, J.L. 1995. Profile of veterinary services in New Zealand. Rome, FAO.
Cheneau, Y. 1984. Towards new structures for the development of animal husbandry in Africa south of the Sahara. Rev. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz., 3(3): 621-627.
Cheneau, Y. 1985. The organization of veterinary services in Africa. Rev. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz., 5(1): 107-154.
CTA (Technical Centre for Agriculture and Rural Cooperation). 1985a. Seminar on a Primary Animal Health Care Structure. 24-26 October 1984, Bujumbura, Burundi.
CTA (Technical Centre for Agriculture and Rural Cooperation). 1985b. Proceedings of the Seminar on Primary Animal Health Care in Africa. 25-28 September 1985, Balantyre, Malawi.
de Haan, C. & Bekure, S. 1991. Animal health services in sub-Saharan Africa: initial experiences with alternative approaches. World Bank Technical Papers No. 134. Washington, DC, World Bank.
FAO. 1991. Guidelines for strengthening animal health services in developing countries. Rome.
FAO. 1994. Expert Consultation on Application of effective herd health and production programmes to increase livestock productivity in developing countries. 30 March-1 April 1993, Rome.
FAO. 1996. World livestock production systems - current status, issues and trends. FAO Animal Production and Health Paper No. 127. Rome.
FAO/RLAC. 1992. Report of the round table on privatization of the veterinary services in Latin America and the Caribbean. 12-14 November 1991, Santiago, Chile.
FAO/RNEA. 1994. Study on privatization of veterinary services in the Near East region. Report of a meeting, 28-30 June 1994, Cairo, Egypt.
Fassi-Fehri, B.E.C. & Bakkoury, M. 1995. Profile of the veterinary services in Morocco. Rome, FAO.
Gatongi, P.M., Scott, M.E., Ranjan, S., Gathuma, J.M., Munyna, W.K., Cheruiyot, H. & Prichard, R.K. 1993. Effects of three nematode anthelmintic treatment regimes on flock performance of sheep and goats under extensive management in semi-arid Kenya, Vet. Parasitology, 68: 323-336.
Holden, S., Ashley, S. & Bazeley, P. 1996. Improving the delivery of animal health services in developing countries: a literature review. Somerset, UK, Livestock in Development.
Howard, J.R. 1969. Costs of feedlot disease and prevention programs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 154(10): 1166-1167.
Ilemobade, A.A. 1996. Privatization of veterinary services within the context of structural adjustment in Zimbabwe, Namibia and Ghana. Rome, FAO.
Jemal, A. & Hugh-Jones, M.E. 1995. Association of tsetse control with health and productivity of cattle in the Didessa Valley, western Ethiopia. Prev. Vet. Med., 22: 29-40.
Leonard, D.K. 1987. The supply of veterinary services: Kenyan lessons. Agric. Admin. & Extension, 26: 219-236.
Leonard, D.K. 1993. Structural reform of the veterinary profession in Africa and the new institutional economics. Dev. & Change, 24: 227-267.
McCorkle, C.M. & Mathias, E. 1996. Paraveterinary healthcare programmes: a global overview. In K.-H. Zessin, ed. Livestock production and diseases in the tropics: livestock production and human welfare. Proceedings of the VII International Conference of Institutions of Tropical Veterinary Medicine, Vol. II, p. 544-549. 25-29 September 1994, Berlin. Feldafing, Deusche Stifung fur Internationale Entwicklung.
McInerney, J.P., Howe, K.S. & Schepers, J.A. 1992. A framework for the economical analysis of disease in farm livestock. Prev. Vet. Med., 13: 137-154.
Mehraban, A.B., Barker, T. & Ward, D.E. 1996. Community-based animal health and production in Afghanistan - a delivery system. Paper presented at the Asian-Australian Animal Production Meeting, 13-18 October 1996, Makuhari, Japan.
Mukhebi, A.W., Kariuki, D.P., Mussukuya, E., Mullins, G., Nugumi, P.N., Thorpe, W. & Perry, B.D. 1995. Assessing the economic impact of immunisation against East Coast fever: a case study in Coast Province. Kenya. Vet. Rec., 137: 17-22.
OIE (International Office of Epizootics). 1995. Recommendation of the OIE: appropriate privatisation of veterinary practice in Africa. Rabat, Morocco.
Ott, S.L., Hillberg Seistzinger, A. & Hueston, W.D. 1995. Measuring the national economic benefits of reducing livestock mortality. Prev. Vet. Med., 24: 203-211.
Peagram, R.G., James, A.D., Bamhare, C., Dolan, T.T., Hove, T., Kan, G.K. & Latif, A.A. 1996. Effects of immunisation against Theileria parva on beef cattle productivity and economics of control options. Trop. Anim. Health Prod., 28: 99-11.
Schillhorn van Veen, T.W. & de Haan, C. 1995. Trends in the organization and financing of livestock and animal health services. Prev. Vet. Med., 25: 225-240.
Schreuder, B.E.C., Moll, H.A.J., Noorman, N., Halimi, C., Kroese, A.H. & Wassink, G. 1995. A benefit-cost analysis of veterinary intervention in Afghanistan based on a livestock mortality study. Prev. Vet. Med., 26: 303-314.
Sidahmed, A.E. 1995. Livestock development and rangelands management cluster: privatization of veterinary services in sub-Saharan Africa. Rome, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
Swallow, B.M., Mulatu, W. & Leak, S.G.A. 1995. Potential demand for a mixed public-private animal health input: evaluation of a pour-on insecticide for controlling tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis in Ethiopia. Prev. Vet. Med., 24: 265-275.
Till, J.E. 1995. Building credibility in public studies. Am. Sci., 83(Sept-Oct): 468-473.
Umali, D., Feder, G. & de Haan, C. 1992. The balance between public and private sector activities in the delivery of livestock services. World Bank Discussion Papers No. 63. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Umali, D. & Schwartz, L. 1994. Public and private agricultural extension: beyond traditional frontiers. World Bank Discussion Papers No. 236, Washington, DC, World Bank.
Wamukoya, J.P.O., Gathuma, J.W. & Mutiga, E.R. 1995. Spontaneous private veterinary practices evolved in Kenya since 1988. Rome, FAO.
<section>8</section>
Annex 1. Glossary and acronyms
ANIMAL HEALTH ASSISTANTS (AHAB) or ANIMAL HEALTH TECHNICIANS (AHTs), (agents techniques d'élevage in French; técnico agrícola, técnico de laboratorio in Spanish; inspetor de carnes (técnico), enfermeiro in Portuguese) are persons having undergone formal training in their respective tasks over a minimum of two years. The term also includes laboratory assistants, meat inspectors, assistant veterinarians and animal nurses (FAO, 1991).
AUXILIARY PERSONNEL (village relais in French; guarda sanitario or vacunador in Portuguese) are persons who have received short-course and/or in-service training and include stock inspectors, vaccinators, inseminators and primary animal health care workers.
NOTE: The term paraveterinarian is extremely broad and has been a source of contention since it includes AHAB, AHTs and auxiliaries; this consultation prefers to avoid the use of the term and recommends that when it is used, it be defined.
COMMERCIALIZE: the user pays full cost for specific private goods and services.
CONTESTABLE SERVICES are public duties or functions, currently on offer by the public sector, but which government authorities have decided could be executed, supervised or managed by a private-sector entity. The decision as to who delivers a given service can be contested or negotiated with government authorities.
COST RECOVERY: a user pays for, or contributes towards the full cost of specific services provided by the public veterinary service by virtue of their responsibility.
CVO: chief veterinary officer
DVS: director of veterinary services
DSV: directeur des services vétérinaires (French)
DSE: directeur des services d l'élevage (French)
DLS: director of livestock services
NOTE: In francophone countries the functions of the DVS/DSV may include livestock production responsibilities, hence the acronym DSE. Likewise, in anglophone countries the acronym DLS is commonly used. Other equivalent acronyms may apply in specific countries.
NOTE: The popular term decentralization is often used instead of deconcentration or devolution. Since the three terms have different meanings when used in francophone or anglophone countries, precise definitions of the words are provided below.
DECENTRALIZATION: any reorganization that moves decision-making away from the centre of authority. French and Spanish usage restricts decentralization to grants of authority to bodies that are legally autonomous from the central state; in English this type of decentralization is captured by subcategories of devolution (to autonomous geographical units of government), delegation to autonomous corporations (for parastatals) and privatization (for philanthropic and profit-making bodies). In English, deconcentration (a grant of authority to a lower geographical level of the central government) is also considered a form of decentralization, whereas this is not the case in French or Spanish. Because of the above linguistic confusion and because decentralization has multiple forms, this document uses the terms for its subtypes instead.
DECONCENTRATION: a transfer or allocation of authority to lower or local levels of administration or particular interests; the state retains the same responsibilities but entrusts them to local levels of national administration.
DEVOLUTION: to reorganize into more autonomous units where the state gives up certain activities that are assumed by local bodies.
DIVESTMENT: to take away tasks or activities (or property) currently vested with the public sector, either officially or unofficially, giving responsibility for implementation or management to the private sector. Divestment is synonymous with privatization.
DOWNSIZING: reducing the capacity, size or responsibility of an entity to adopt to new needs; also euphemistically called rightsizing.
EXTERNALITIES (spillover effects) are costs (disadvantages) or benefits that the activity (or lack thereof) of one agent imposes upon another, in the absence of any financial compensation. That is, the use or non-use of a good or service affects the condition of neighbours. Externalities may be negative or positive. For example, the non-vaccination of a herd against foot-and-mouth disease facilitates transmission to other herds.
LIBERALIZATION: to reduce public sector control over the economy, specifically by means that increase the freedom of the market, e.g. reduction or lifting of restriction on domestic or external trade; or allowing producers, suppliers, distributors and vendors more access to veterinary inputs and their market.
MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATIONS (MOs): a body of persons organized to provide services to their members and governed and financed by the members, e.g. a producer cooperative, milk marketing society, herders' association and grassroots community organizations, etc.
MONOPOLIES: a state of denial of choice, e.g. a monopoly exists when users have no possibility of going to another supplier.
MORAL HAZARD: a condition in which the information between two partners linked in a trading relationship is asymmetrical, i.e. one partner may deceive the other. For example, it is difficult for the average consumer to differentiate between the quality, safety or efficacy of a veterinary remedy. When quality controls are weak, public action is justified to protect buyers by enforcing quality standards. The state has responsibility in cases of moral hazard.
PRIVATE GOOD or SERVICE: where the benefit resulting from the use of a service or good accrues exclusively to the purchaser (non-joint use) and consumption of the good or service by one person reduces its availability to others (non-open access).
PRIVATIZATION is the transfer to the private sector of activities, functions, responsibilities or property that have rested with the public sector. The objectives of privatization may include i) the relief of the financial and administrative burdens of government; ii) improvement in efficiency and productivity; iii) facilitating economic growth; iv) reduction in the size and presence of the public sector in the economy; and v) helping to meet national economic productivity targets (Babjee, 1996).
PUBLIC GOOD or SERVICE: use of a good or service does not exclusively benefit one person (open access); consumption of a good or service does not reduce its availability for others (joint use). The public character of goods or services does not imply that the body providing these goods or services should be public. The difference between public and private goods is not absolute, but there are graduations. For example, MOs, NGOs and private veterinary practitioners may be contracted for public campaigns.
RESTRUCTURING: changing the organizational structures and/or the job descriptions of staff.
RULES AND REGULATIONS are legally enforceable standards, one economic purpose of which is to internalize externalities (negative or positive). An example is the enforced requirement for area-wide foot-and-mouth disease vaccination to achieve biological control (and efficiency) against the disease.
SERVICE: commonly refers to a job or task performed (clinical examination and treatment, embryo transfer service) or to a branch of public employment (national veterinary service); thus, the term may include goods and infrastructure.
STAKEHOLDERS: groups having an interest in, bringing outside pressure on, and having a potential for gain or loss from, an enterprise or agency. It also includes groups that have shared values.
STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT: a set of measures applied in response to dysfunctional macro-economic conditions within the domestic economy and aimed at reducing deficit spending by governments, reducing inflation rates, increasing the competitiveness (by currency devaluation) of domestic industries, and other measures.
SUBSIDY: a transfer payment of direct financial assistance, especially made by governments, to facilitate access to selected services; it is intended to be temporary and generally causes distortion in the economy.
TRADITIONAL HEALER: a person who has not received formal training (in the Western medical sense) but carries out acts of treating animals (and/or humans) based on his or her accumulated experience, expertise and tradition.
<section>9</section>
Annex. 2 Negotiating framework for rationalizing delivery of public and private veterinary services
Stage / Purpose
Agreement among
Advice available from
Product / Output
Time allotted
I Assembling a Veterinary Services Council and a Transition Team
Veterinary services organization and key stakeholders
Legal advisers, technical development agencies
Agreed terms of reference and mandate for the Veterinary Services Council and for the Transition Team
Maximum of six months
II Identifying current strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT analysis) of the veterinary services delivery system; defining components of the required enabling environment; and the strategy for reorganization. The OIE questionnaire on assessing veterinary services delivery may also be used as a guide
Domestic stakeholders, Veterinary Services Council and government authorities; funding agency agreement in principle if loan or grant is envisaged
Bilateral/multilateral funding agencies, technical development agencies, consultants commitments; resources; and national
Transition Action Plan that takes into account document Principles for rational delivery of public and private veterinary services with reference to Africa; national economic policies and development plan
Maximum of 12 months after Stage I
III Veterinary Services Council obtains specific commitments, financial resources and institutional and legal authority required to implement the Transition Action Plan from relevant ministries and agencies
Government ministries, domestic banks, funding agency and others as appropriate
Bilateral/multilateral funding agencies, technical development agencies, consultants
Government authorization to proceed
Up to six months after Stage II is completed
IV Implementation of Transition Action Plan, including pilot projects or phases
Domestic stakeholders, government ministries and funding agency
Bilateral/multilateral funding agencies, technical development agencies, consultants
Reorganized institutions, changed statutes, associations, continuing education and in-service training programmes established; loans for divestment of assets and functions; reorganized functions in the public service and private sector
Twice yearly review and/or technical back-stopping by funding agencies
<section>a</section>
Explanatory notes
The negotiating framework is a dynamic and flexible guideline for adaptation to a given country's stage along the process of reorganization, using appropriate nomenclature and meeting local domestic policy needs. However, as a flexible guideline excessive time need not be lost in negotiating over trivial issues such as the names given to various teams, bodies or councils. The focus should be on substantive policy issues ensuring delivery of appropriate services to stakeholders and clients. Should substantive agreement not be met within the allotted time, negotiations need to stop for six months to allow for rethinking and a fresh start when negotiations resume.
Countries embarking on the reorganization of their veterinary services for the first time may readily begin at stage I. Countries well advanced with reorganization may wish to begin at various convenient entry points when considering sub-issues or newly emerging issues relating to reorganization. Countries at any stage may well find value in reviewing the check list of key issues in order to recall contentious issues (see p. 28), the guiding principles for delivery of public and private veterinary services, and the critical need for consultation with key stakeholders during the reorganization process.
To initiate stage I, the Minister of Agriculture, the Permanent Secretary and/or the Chief Veterinary Officer should agree on terms of reference for both the Veterinary Services Council and the Transition Team (suggested names), which clearly set out in general terms the specific steps in the consultative processes required to draft a time-bound, Transition Action Plan that defines the aims of the restructuring and divestment plan, recognizable steps along the way, and who will be responsible for what. The mandate will set out the government authority to commission the agreed terms of reference. The bodies will be empowered by the relevant government ministries with a mandate that delegates authority; provides a budget; sets boundaries within which to operate; determines to whom each body reports to; and establishes the overall expected time frame for completion of the work.
The Minister of Agriculture, the Permanent Secretary and/or the Chief Veterinary Officer may nominate the Veterinary Services Council made up of from five to seven senior representatives and prominent citizens from the public veterinary service; national treasury; pharmaceutical industry association; livestock producer groups; private veterinary practitioners; and consumer groups. The Veterinary Services Council will be the advisory committee for the transition process. The Transition Team could be seen as the board of the Veterinary Services Council and made up of one government representative from the treasury department, one livestock raiser and the Chief Veterinary Officer. An Executive Officer could be employed by the board. The Transition Team can be seen as the implementing arm of the Veterinary Services Council.
The allotted six months should be a maximum limit; preferably, considerably less time should be required to agree among stakeholders on the composition of the Transition Team, the Veterinary Services Council, and to produce the terms of reference.
Stage II is the crucial time allotted to obtain agreements among the major domestic stakeholders as to the aims of the reorganized veterinary services and thus how key stakeholder needs' will be met. The Transition Action Plan is the blueprint for arriving at a reorganized and restructured, broadly based public and private veterinary service, veterinary professional association, and statutory body, should any of these not exist or require redefinition. Substantial agreement among all key stakeholders is crucial.
Representatives of bilateral or multilateral funding agencies should actively participate at this and subsequent stages through the provision of practical advice based on their institutional experience and policies as well as technical advice on the process of negotiations and results expected. The Transition Action Plan should be agreed in principle by one or more funding agencies in order to plan realistically the reorganization, meet preconditions for a loan or grant, understand the economic and technical philosophy of the funding agencies, and to estimate the desired time frame for transition. Twelve months should be a maximum time allotted to complete this stage.
Stage III is a defined period during which resources and legal authority should be pledged from a funding agency or agencies, concerned government ministries and other statutory authorities. A government authorization or administrative decree should be obtained in order to proceed with the Transition Action Plan.
Stage IV is the time needed to implement the Transition Action Plan and any pilot projects or phases with support from concerned government ministries and agencies, and advanced authorizations from the funding agencies.
CHECK LIST OF KEY ISSUES
Many African countries have reviewed, and continue to review, their policies for public and private veterinary services delivery. While countries may be advanced in this process, it is well recognized that the process of review and reorganization must be continual. The check list of key issues below, and the process to resolve them, are presented for the convenience of decision-makers and stakeholders in order to make country-specific adaptations.
Key stakeholders continually consulted
All key stakeholders with interests in animal health and production or the delivery of public health services should be included in the process of change. Producers (both commercial and subsistence); government technical ministries; the national treasury; the private sector (veterinary practitioners, distributors, traders, etc.); bankers; the veterinary association; and the veterinary statutory body should be represented. Consumer groups, trade associations and employees of government ministries (as represented through unions or associations) may be stakeholders and may need to be represented. Decisions should be taken in a transparent manner.
Special efforts are often needed to include producers (rural and intra-urban) or urban consumers in the consultation process. Representatives from membership organizations, selected NGOs, and grassroots producer groups have a useful role to play together with government and industry in discussions and decision-making relating to the delivery of veterinary services.
Definition of the pressure for change
The ultimate reason for change is suboptimal veterinary services, in their broadest sense, which do not contribute effectively to improved livestock productivity nor to enhanced human welfare. The main pressures for change should come from within the country, i.e., from clients who are now poorly served by existing structures. Any resulting change in the delivery of veterinary services should result in better and more effective services.
Pressures may arise from outside the country, from, for example, the World Trade Organization, International Office of Epizootics, or from importing country requirements; economic shocks (oil prices); or incentives (prequalifications for funding agency assistance). Pressures may arise from within, from economic reality that necessitates new policies for structural adjustment; the commercial livestock sector wishing to enter international markets; urban consumers demanding sufficient wholesome food; other producers; or government development plans.
Identify contentious issues
Each stakeholder group should identify priority issues needing to be discussed and assemble supporting arguments for positions taken. Issues at a minimum, among many others, could include:
(i) the functions, tasks and responsibilities not permitted by paraprofessionals under the practice acts and the degree of supervision warranted;
(ii) classes of and prohibited use of veterinary remedies by producers and pare-professionals with objective, economic and scientifically based criteria for making these decisions;
(iii) defining the realistic level of quality, availability and access to veterinary services and remedies by various stakeholders;
(iv) measurement of the cost efficiency (or cost minimization) of various services against public sector and private sector responsibilities;
(v) setting the level of user fees;
(vi) delegation of control over user fees and revolving funds;
(vii) the types of services and inputs required and the level of cost subsidy for selected services, particularly in marginal livestock producing areas;
(viii) training and continuing education requirements for each cadre of animal health care provider;
(ix) guidelines or regulations for membership organizations and community-based groups to contract required animal health and production services;
(x) methods for quantitative measurement of the public veterinary services, production changes, and access to services and inputs required in order to evaluate the results of reorganization of the delivery system;
(xi) ensuring a balance between effective delivery of public sector responsibilities, both domestic and international, and functions delegated to the private sector;
(xii) justifying policies to allow or prohibit the undertaking for remuneration of private practice activities by public-employed veterinarians (and other publicly employed animal health care providers), either under specific circumstances during regular working hours or after official working hours;
(xiii) mechanisms to ensure access to necessary veterinary and production services by marginalized groups in an equitable manner; and
(xiv) clear procedures for full withdrawal of the official veterinary services from delivering private sector functions (clinical treatment, remedy distribution, etc.) as a precondition to enabling private veterinary practices to become established while not unduly restricting access to these functions in the transition period.
Decision-making on contentious issues
Decisions should be made taking into account economic realities; Principles for rational delivery of public and private veterinary services with reference to Africa and in light of competing but shared interests of key stakeholders. This is a continual process that may be aided by the steps set out in the negotiating framework.
The experiences of other countries, viewed in light of local conditions, would be a helpful adjunct to designing pilot projects or phasing reorganization of service delivery. The evaluation of pilot projects implemented to test various strategies would be a useful and necessary exercise.
Continual process of consultation, review and modification
The time required for the process of change and the achievement of desired results must not be underestimated. This is particularly true when major reforms in government ministries need to take place or legislation needs to be passed into law. However, experience dictates that the process of rationalization and privatization of service delivery need not wait for statutes to be enacted nor for government structures to be reorganized. The change process points out the need to alter policies, structures and statutes, while government regulatory and legislative bodies need to react such that a dynamic enabling environment is fostered. The government also has the role of representing the broadly-based national interests during the change process. Additionally, time is required for the private sector to assume some of the functions formerly undertaken by the government, such as establishing structures for marketing livestock products and distributing inputs.
