<title>Marine biotechnology and developing countries</title>
Raymond A. Zilinskas Carl Gustaf Lundin
Copyright © 1993
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433, U S.A
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printings August 1993
Discussion Papers present results of country analysis or research that is circulated to encourage discussion and comment within the development community. To present these results with the least possible delay, the typescript of this paper has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formal printed texts, and the World Bank accepts no responsibility for errors.
The findings. interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attribute d in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive e Directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility what so ever for any consequence of their use Any maps that accompany the text have been prepared solely for the convenience of readers: the designations and presentation of material in them do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Bank, its affiliates, or its Board or member countries concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, or area or of the authorities thereof or concerning the delimitation of its boundaries or its national affiliation.
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Requests for permission to reproduce portions of it should be sent to the Office of the Publisher at the address shown in the copyright notice above. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally give permission promptly and, when the reproduction is for noncommercial purposes, without asking a fee. Permission to copy portions for classroom use is granted through the Copyright Clearance Center, 27 Congress Street, Salem, Massachusetts 0197(3, U.S.A.
The complete backlist of publications from the World Bank is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which contains an alphabetical title list (with full ordering information) and indexes of subjects, authors, and countries and regions. The latest edition is available free of charge from the Distribution Unit, Office of the Publisher. The World Bank, ISIS H Street, N.W., Washington. D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World Bank, 66, avenue d'Iéna 75116 Paris, France.
ISSN: 0259-910 X
Raymond A. Zilinskas is a consultant and Carl Gustaf Lundin an environmental specialist in the Land, Water and Natural Habitats Division of the World Bank's Environment Department.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
<section>Foreword</section>
Nobel Laureate Abdus Salam has named the twenty-first century, "The Biological Age." What he is alluding to, I believe, is that the current evolution in biotechnology will reach an even more exciting stage in the next twenty years or so, profoundly affecting the wellbeing of individuals and the economies of nations. Eventually, biotechnology will influence in some way virtually all of mankind's productive activities - whether they be agriculture, health delivery, environmental remediation, industry or energy production. It is important then to approach biotechnology cautiously by planning wisely, acting deliberately, and monitoring applications closely over the long term to ensure that these influences are constructive, benefiting both mankind and the environment.
"The Biological Age" can also be expected to benefit more than just the rich, industrial countries. Professor Salam and many others have shown clearly that biotechnology is particularly appropriate for the developing world. There are several reasons for this favorable assessment: (1) many developing countries are in the semi-tropical and tropical climates that produce rich and diverse biological resources, the substrate for biotechnology and for sustainable economic development; (2) most developing countries have sufficient grounding in the biological sciences and technologies that underlie biotechnology to be able to build capacity even in advanced techniques; and (3) entry costs for biotechnology research and industrial application, although significant, are lower than for other high technologies.
In order to transform the promise of biotechnology into reality, however, a government must make a considerable commitment to building the requisite science and technology capability. As is made clear in this report, capability-building in biotechnology is a complex, expensive and long-term effort that requires sustained funding until both the scientific base and the industry are established. Governments must also promote conditions supportive to the biotechnology industry, such as cooperative R&D ventures between research facilities and the private sector to transform research findings into commercial products or processes. This cooperation and support is crucial in biotechnology both (1) because of the inherent relationship between discovery and application (for example, when a particular genetic process is discovered, it introduces a process of interest to industry at the same time); and (2) because of the need for continued scientific involvement in the industrial
development of that process (a situation quite unlike that of other technologies, regardless of how complex they are).
For example, a country can set up an automobile industry by importing the expertise and technologies necessary to do so. Setting up and operating the automobile operation, as complex as it is, can be done without involving research scientists in the effort. Not so with biotechnology. Because the biotechnology industry involves the manipulation of living and therefore dynamic biological systems to achieve products or processes, trained scientists that know these systems are necessary to solve the problems inherent in operating them. The biotechnology industry, therefore, breaks down the usual delineations between basic research, applied research, development and manufacturing; and governments' support for all of these activities is a major factor in its success.
As this report points out, however, international agencies can provide crucial assistance to complement and ease the process. For example, assistance might take the form of supporting special training for scientists or industrial managers in technology transfer, biosafety and intellectual property issues.
To date, World Bank involvement in biotechnology is rather limited, and entering an emerging field at its beginning is a departure from previous Bank practice. There are several reasons for proposing this initiative. First, the marine area is relatively neglected in Bank investments - only a small fraction of that channeled to land-based efforts. Supporting marine biotechnology, therefore, would be a step toward balancing these levels of effort. Second, many developing countries are island countries or have long coastlines; yet, most of these have not developed their marine potential, except for fisheries and some aquaculture. Marine biotechnology could be one of the means toward sustainable, environmentally sound, development of ocean resources. The remediation of polluted coastal waters and beaches also could be done via marine biotechnology. Third, solving global environmental problems will require participation from all countries, including the developing world. Without
worldwide cooperation, such problems as the "greenhouse" effect, pollution of the high seas, destruction of coral reefs, loss of marine biodiversity in general, and certain water-borne infectious diseases will defy solution. In the process of building their capability in marine biotechnology, developing countries will concurrently build the expertise that can be deployed to investigate and solve local environmental problems, and to collaborate in solving global problems as well.
Fundamental to the development of biotechnology, and to any cooperative ventures, however, is that governments, scientists, private sectors, and international development organizations must first learn of the potential and problems of this new scientific endeavor, especially as they relate to the home countries. The express intent of this report, therefore, is to publicize the potentials of marine biotechnology for economic development and problem solving; identify some of the possible risks inherent in this field (and how they can be avoided or controlled); and clarify various investment options for international development organizations. The Environment Department presents this paper to further these purposes and to encourage discussion of how the Bank can best lend its support to this emerging area of science and technology, to the benefit of sustainable development.
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
This report would not have been possible without the assistance, cooperation and other support by a rather large number of persons who supplied information about their countries or the organizations they work for, reviewed drafts of the report, informed us of scientific and technical progress and clarified their implications, and in general encouraged us to persist in our endeavor. More specifically, we thank the following persons for their assistance as noted.
Information about their countries' activities in marine biotechnology or related areas was provided by Dr. Martin Abraham (Malaysia), Dr. Gideon Abu (Nigeria), Dr. Shanta Achuthankutty (India), Dr. Alonso Cardenas Aguilera (Chile), Dr. Kamaluddin Ahmad (Bangladesh), Dr. M.S. Andhale (India), Dr. E. Montenegro Arcila (Chile), Dr. Angel A. Baron L. (Dominican Republic), Dr. Enrique Bertullo (Uruguay), Mr. N.B. Bhosle (India), Cr. Vanderlel Perez Canhos (Brazil), Dr. Saipin Chaiyanan (Thailand), Mr. M. Chandrasekaran (India), Dr. Dong-Suck Chang (Republic of Korea), Dr. S.T. Chang (Hong Kong), Dr. Young-Meng Chiang (Taiwan), Dr. Ho Coy Choke (Malaysia), Mr. Pang Daode (China), Dr. Chen Dou (China), Dr. Ossama M. ElTayeb (Egypt), Dr. S.O. Emejuaiwe (Nigeria), Dr. Esther Fernandez A. (Venezuela), Dr. J.L.R. Pino Gaviño (Peru), Dr. Twee Hormchong (Thailand), Dr. Wei-Shang Ji (China), Dr. Koyoaki Katoh (Indonesia), Dr. Mohammed Moazzam Khan (Pakistan), Dr. Aida Lackany (Egypt),
Mrs. Trisnaui Dyah Listyawati (Indonesia), Dr. Milagrosa R. Martinez (Philippines), Dr. Enrique C. Mateo (Peru), Dr. M.L. Lizarraga-Partida (Mexico), Dr. Patricio Bernal Ponce (Chile), Dr. T.S.S. Rao (India), Mr. P.M. Satheesh Seshaiya (India), Dr. Thiarn Peng Teo (Singapore), Dr. Luiz R. Trabulsi (Brazil), Dr. C.K. Tseng (China) and Dr. Xun Xu (China).
Several professionals from intergovernmental organizations reviewed an earlier draft of this report and provided many useful comments. Some also described pertinent activities sponsored by their organizations. In these regards, we thank Dr. D. Bartley (FAO), Dr. V. Campbell (UNIDO), Ms. I. Douek-Hykin (World Bank), Mr. S. Garcia (FAO), Mr. V. Kotchetkov (UNESCO), Mr. G. Kullenberg (IOC), Dr. T. Matsusato (FAO), Mr. M. Schneider (UNEP), Dr. G. Tzotzos (ICGEB/UNIDO) and Mr. K. Venkatararnan (UNIDO).
The scientific/technical reviewers of draft reports included Dr. R.R. Colwell, Dr. T. Veach Long II, Dr. Mark Ragan and Dr. T.S.S. Rao.
Last, we appreciate very much the help we received from World Bank professionals while this project was under way and the kind indulgence they granted our requests for assistance. Our gratitude is especially directed to Dr. Eric Arrhenius, Dr. Maritta KochWeser, Mr. Jan Post, Dr. E.W. Thulstrup, and Dr. Colin Rees. The fine editing by Ms. Charlotte Maxey is also gratefully acknowledged.
<section>Introduction</section>
This report provides an analysis of the potential of industrial applications of marine biotechnology and is focused on developing countries of the world. It makes clear that biotechnology's potential for remediating economic and social problems of developing countries is extraordinary. However, it is important to realistically assess what can be done in selected areas of biotechnology. Biotechnology is not a panacea to cure all ills of mankind, especially problems arising from population increase, over-utilization of natural resources, and underutilization of human talent. However, some areas of biotechnology have extraordinary potential to address some of these problems - and marine biotechnology is one of the most attractive of those disciplines.
The oceans cover about 75 percent of the earth's surface. Developing countries are predominantly riparian and, for the most part, depend on the oceans for protein, in the form of fish, shellfish and seaweed. A resource that has not been fully tapped, which represents potential income in addition to fisheries, is marine pharmaceuticals. The diversity of the marine environment in tropical areas is well recognized. It is wide-ranging and of unusual extent. Many developing countries are blessed with resources in the form of extraordinary biological diversity.
In recent years, relationships of marine bacteria with corals, sponges, invertebrate animals in the marine environment, as well as seaweeds and marine plants, have been intensively studied. Results from this research demonstrate complex chemical interactions between these bacteria and their hosts including systems of elaborate signaling and territorial marking. In studying the chemicals produced by marine organisms, a variety of toxins and chemical compounds have been described. Many of these chemicals have proven to be of potential pharmaceutical value. However, I estimate that far less than 1 percent of potentially useful chemicals from marine living sources have been screened so far. The chemical compounds that remain to be discovered represent one of earth's greatest treasures.
In addition to marine pharmaceuticals, enhancement of fisheries via aquaculture offers great value. Overharvesting of the world oceans is recognized as a global threat. The ability to produce transgenic fish and shellfish in culture, which grow faster and to a larger size with more efficient utilization of nutrients, is of particular value to developing countries, not only as a source of food, but also as export products. This report analyses the industry and offers some clear recommendations for enhancement of marine fisheries.
Other areas of marine biotechnology that are of great potential include marine bioremediation; for example, use of marine microorganisms to mineralize and degrade toxic chemicals spilled into the marine environment. Research has been done that shows that enhancement of biodegradation can be achieved by adding nutrients, mainly phosphates and nitrates, to spills in coastal areas and along shore lines. While much research needs to be done before reliable, safe and efficacious bioremediation processes are ready for large-scale use, it is certain that these techniques can greatly benefit those countries where environmental contamination has reached threatening proportions. It is not yet clear how bioremediation can be deployed in operations to treat offshore or open ocean spills.
The potential of marine biotechnology in areas other than those I have mentioned lies in exploitation of resources in an environmentally protective way. The value of biotechnology is that the genetic capability of marine organisms can be harnessed through the cloning of the genetic material into systems that can be manipulated and magnified in the laboratory, without depleting the resource in the natural environment.
It has been stated that the oceans are underutilized in their capacity for feeding the populations of countries of the world, but classical approaches to technology (that is, fish farming and seaweed farming) are limited to maximum yield much as is land agriculture. However, with the application of genetic engineering, the productivity of the coastal areas can be greatly improved. The forces at play are the increasing populations of nearshore regions along with increased demand for commercially valuable marine products. Thus, the future requires that a coordinated approach to biotechnology be applied in the marine environment, coupling bioremediation and applications of biotechnology with the production of fish and shellfish through aquaculture.
The information provided in this document lays the groundwork for an effective and efficient design of a plan of action for developing marine biotechnology in all countries of the world, but developing countries that aspire to improve living conditions for their populations are likely to be the main beneficiaries.
<section>Note from the authors</section>
This report focuses on a rapidly emerging science-based technology - marine biotechnology. The term "marine biotechnology" differs in meaning among scientists. We think of marine biotechnology as a collection of research and developmental activities in the biological, chemical and environmental sciences that occur in or are related to the marine environment. Only a few specialized facilities, located mostly in the United States and Japan are dedicated to research exclusively in marine biotechnology. However, many more laboratories have researchers working in marine biotechnology related areas.
"Emerging," for the purpose of this report, means that the technology is at a stage in its developmental cycle when practical applications engendered by the technology are being identified and laboratory processes and techniques are being moved into practice. Looking at the term from another perspective, an emerging technology is one that the public and its representatives begin to recognize as having the potential to generate new scientific knowledge and produce useful new products and processes. Marine biotechnology research has produced a few applications to date, but its potential economic effects are substantial, to be realized in five or ten years.
Many island and riparian developing countries are fortunate in possessing territories of subtropical and tropical marine waters that shelter a large diversity of estuarine and marine life. At the same time, large areas of their marine and coastal environments suffer from the detrimental effects of manmade pollutants. The largest promises of marine biotechnology are thus in two areas. First, some of its techniques may be deployed for the sustainable exploitation of natural resources under environmentally sound conditions; and second, other marine biotechnology techniques can be used to break down pollutants, to alleviate environmental damage.
The intent of this report is to introduce marine biotechnology to nonspecialists, clarify its relevance to developing countries, and outline the role of the World Bank and of other international agencies in helping to advance it. However, marine biotechnology cannot be considered in isolation; after all, it is that intersect where biotechnology meets and overlaps with the marine environment and its living resources. A brief review of relevant aspects of the oceans and the life they support and an introduction to the wider field of biotechnology are useful as a starting point. Thus, Chapter 1 sets the stage for the marine part of marine biotechnology by briefly describing and discussing certain aspects of the marine environment that are pertinent to biotechnology. In Chapter 2 is found a primer on biotechnology, consisting of a review of its history, a presentation of recent developments in this field, and an explanation of its "classic" and "advanced" components. Special
attention is given to advanced biotechnology, including its workforce and equipment requirements and the possible risks biotechnology research, testing and products may pose to scientific workers and society. Chapter 3 is the heart of this review; it defines marine biotechnology and provides a description of major sub-areas (suggestions for how marine biotechnology should be defined are found in Appendix C). Our consideration of marine biotechnology continues in Chapter 4, where options for developing countries in this field delineated and analyzed. Specifically, each of the nine subareas of marine biotechnology is assessed in terms of promise for developing countries in the short and medium term and the degree of difficulty inherent in capability building (we
list institutes in developing countries whose work programs encompass marine biotechnology or related areas in Appendix A). Methods for building capability in biotechnology and in marine biotechnology are explained in Chapter ~ (some specific requirements for advanced biotechnology R&D are listed in Appendix B). Examples of projects in marine biotechnology and related areas supported by major intergovernmental agencies, including the World Bank, are presented in Chapter 6. In Chapter 7 we elaborate explicit proposals for how the World Bank can promote marine biotechnology capability building in developing countries, including ensuring that results from research are applied in national problem solving and for economic development. We conclude the substantive part of the report with a short essay on why it is important now for developing countries to commit to capability building in marine biotechnology and why intergovernmental organizations should assist in this endeavor.
This report is intended mainly for World Bank professionals who in the future may formulate and administer projects in marine biotechnology. Thus, the language is largely nontechnical, and when technical terms are used they are defined. In addition, a glossary of technical terms is provided. Those who wish to delve more deeply into the subject matter may consult the references.
<section>Executive Summary</section>
The tremendous diversity of life in tropical and subtropical seas represents the world's most abundant, but least utilized, living resources. Island countries such as Haiti, Indonesia and the Philippines, as well as countries favored with long cost lines, including Chile, China, India and Sudan, have barely drawn on their marine capital. Thus, some of the poorest countries oversee potentially the earth's richest assets.
Marine biotechnology applications
Marine biotechnology, which is defined as "the application of scientific and engineering principles to the processing of materials by marine biological agents to provide goods and services," has many applications of importance to developing countries - particularly aquaculture, marine natural products chemistry, bioremediation, biofilm or bioadhesion, cell culture, biosensors and terrestrial agriculture.
Aquaculture
Marine biotechnology may benefit aquaculture in two major ways. First, its research techniques can enhance a cultured organism's growth rate, procreation proficiency, disease resistance and ability to endure adverse environmental conditions. The organism's ability to grow and survive in intensive aquaculture will thus be improved, increasing yields. Second, through biotechnology vaccines may be developed against bacterial and viral diseases that commonly afflict marine organisms. Vaccines will protect fish, shrimp and other aquaculture organisms from diseases that now periodically decimate stocks, causing enormous economic damage in Asia and Latin America.
Marine natural products chemistry
As part of their metabolism, many marine organisms secrete compounds that help them survive and that incidentally have properties beneficial to mankind. Screening programs have discovered algae, corals, sponges and tunicates that produce compounds showing antibiotic, anti-tumor, anti-viral or anti-inflammatory properties. As procedures are improved, marine organisms producing antiparasitic, pesticidal, immune-enhancing, growth-promoting, and wound-healing chemicals will certainly be found. This field has substantial possibilities for growth since fewer than 1 percent of marine species have been screened.
Bioremediation
Microorganisms can be used to break down pollutants and wastes in soil or water to harmless or less toxic end products. The microbes used in bioremediation have usually been recovered from natural sites but have had their natural capability for breaking down pollutants enhanced through research and development (R&D). Most bioremediating microorganisms do not survive after the substance they feed on has been destroyed. Because under normal circumstances bioremediation causes less damage to the environment than do the present chemical and steam cleanup methods, it holds significant advantages over conventional techniques for cleaning polluted harbors and waterways, as well as decontaminating estuaries, mangroves and other sensitive coastal communities.
Biofilm and bioadhesion
A variety of marine organisms will settle on surfaces exposed in seawater, eventually forming a crust. Organisms enmeshed in the crust produce acids, which corrode piers, derricks and other structures. Encrustation also increases hull drag in ships, decreasing speed and raising operating costs. At present, paints containing heavy metals are used to coat surfaces, preventing organisms from settling. However, toxic paints pose health hazards to workers and pollute seawater. Marine biotechnology research seeks to clarify the molecular basis of the settling and adhesion process, and the findings may be used to develop clean methods for preventing encrustation by marine organisms.
Cell culture
Algae and other marine plant cells may be cultured in flasks, where they grow and subdivide much like bacteria. Cultured cells can be used to generate whole plants or they can be directed to synthesize natural products. Contrary to the chemical synthesis of compounds, cell culture production is energy conserving and essentially nonpolluting. Many terrestrial plant cell culture systems are already producing pharmaceuticals, food additives and pesticides; marine cell culture systems will certainly be developed in the next few years along similar lines, which will be capable of producing agarose and other valuable marine natural products.
Biosensors
Sensors are devices that detect a specific substance or organism, and in biosensors the detecting element is a special biological material such as a chemoreceptor or an immunological molecule. An example of a chemoreceptor is the crab's sensing antennule, which continually monitors water for dissolved substances ranging in chemical complexity from simple salts to pheromones. In the second kind of sensor, an immunological molecule, the recognition element is a monoclonal antibody or a DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) probe. These biological molecules are extremely selective; a monoclonal antibody will, for instance, bind itself to only one antigen, which may be a virus, a component of a bacterial cell wall, or a specific chemical. Kits based on monoclonal antibodies or DNA probes are being used to quickly detect and accurately identify the pathogenic bacteria causing cholera, shigellosis and typhoid fever, as well as viruses causing, for example, hepatitis. Biosensors may also be
used in public health for such purposes as identifying and monitoring substances and pathogens in the oceans, enabling scientists to establish cause and effect relationships between a particular agent and health events.
Terrestrial agriculture
Marine biotechnology researchers seek to transfer characteristics inherent to marine animals and plants to their terrestrial counterparts. For example, the winter flounder survives sub-zero temperatures that would kill most animals, including other fish. The flounder anti-freeze gene has been synthesized and inserted into yeast and higher plants. Tests are under way to find out if it will protect from sudden freezes crops grown at high altitudes or northern latitudes. Another example involves the world's most salt - tolerant plant, a microalgal species inhabiting the Dead Sea where the salt content is 29 percent. Researchers are implanting genes that code for salt tolerance in crop plants. Success will mean that farmers can grow rice, oil seed plants and other crops in soils irrigated by brackish or salt water.
Biotechnology and developing countries
While biotechnology undoubtedly holds enormous promise for developing countries, that promise cannot be transformed into reality until capability is built in all of the supporting processes needed. In particular, few developing countries have the broad and in depth R&D infrastructure to undertake wide-ranging biotechnology research because they lack the trained scientific personnel, well equipped laboratories and dependable supplies of rare, labile biochemicals. Even fewer have the industrial capability to develop research results and exploit them. In view of these problems, international agencies have a vital role to play by providing technical assistance and by catalyzing joint, cooperative R&D efforts between laboratories and firms in industrial and developing countries.
Precedents exist in natural resource development for fruitful cooperative ventures between R&D units in developing countries and counterparts or industries in industrial countries. Common to these projects is that both sides benefit: the industrial country partner gains access to a raw material and retains certain marketing rights, while the developing country partner gains expertise, financial backing and regional marketing rights. Some of these types of arrangements have been brokered by international agencies, including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and World Health Organization (WHO). These organizations are particularly well placed to assist in developing profit-based options for joint ventures. Risks for failure or misunderstanding can be minimized by the international organization providing expertise in drawing up contracts, making startup funds available, and guiding the partners in the
equitable sharing of intellectual property rights.
Research and applications involving genetically engineered organisms may present risks to workers, populations or other life forms. Risk can be minimized by applying safe procedures as specified by appropriate regulations. Guidelines for biotechnology research and field testing have been formulated by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and a UNEP/UNIDO/ WHO working group has elaborated guidelines for field testing applicable to developing countries. Either set of guidelines may be used as a model by governments when they formulate local laws. However, adapting foreign guidelines and regulations requires expertise in risk assessment and communication. Local scientists and regulators will have to be trained in these subjects, possibly in countries where regulatory frameworks have been developed and the appropriate skills are available.
If wisely and correctly employed, marine biotechnology offers the tools for increasing high quality food supplies; for the sustainable, environmentally sound exploitation of marine natural resources; for deploying bioremediation to destroy or detoxify pollutants harmful to people and the environment; and for improving public health through the accurate detection and continuous monitoring of pathogens and pollutants in coastal waters.
<section>Chapter 1</section>
<section>The marine environment</section>
This chapter has four sections. First, the vertical and horizontal dimensions of oceans and ocean space are described. Second, the number, variety and uniqueness of marine life is portrayed. Third, threats to the marine environment and biodiversity are briefly discussed. Last, the technical means for detecting and monitoring marine events is recounted.
<section>Oceans and ocean space</section>
For this report, it is useful to view the oceans as having a horizontal and a vertical dimension. The horizontal has two aspects; the high seas (blue water) and the coastal margin. The latter is a complex system where land, sea, fresh water and atmosphere interphase. Most of the world's human population lives in the earth's coastal areas, within what is often termed the coastal zone. The coastal margin is thus heavily impacted by both natural inputs and human activity. Understandably, coastal ocean waters are characterized by a high degree of variability in its biochemical and biological properties.
The vertical dimension is the water column. It is in effect a cross section of the ocean space existing between the atmosphere and seabed. Oceanographers call the boundary where ocean water meets with atmosphere the marine microlayer. It is here where a wide range of biological, chemical and physical processes take place that vitally affect, for example, nutrient distribution in ocean waters, the uptake of "greenhouse" gases from the atmosphere, and the gas exchange that provides oxygen to marine organisms. Oil released in the oceans will drastically affect the marine microlayer, principally through slick formation.
Oceans can be considered as giant heat ponds, collecting and storing energy from the sun. However, because water is an efficient insulator, the heat collected from the sun stays just beneath the marine microlayer, in a warm subsurface layer. Depending on geographic location, currents and other physical factors, the subsurface layer can vary in depth, but will rarely exceed 20 meters. This layer supports a profusion of life, including many species raised in aquaculture, and humans favor it for recreational activities.
The thermocline, the thin layer separating the surface layer from deeper waters, marks a precipitous drop in temperature of 5° Celsius (C) or more. Beneath the thermocline, deeper waters support a profusion of life. However, as light is absorbed by water, the biochemical and physiological characteristics of many organisms inhabiting this layer may differ from those found in surface waters. Many marine plants useful to aquaculture will have their roots in deeper, cooler waters.
Lowest in the water column is the cold water of the abyssal depth. The temperature of this water remains a steady 4°- 6° C throughout the world; it is rich in nutrients and virtually free of pathogens. As is discussed below, abyssal depths were once thought to be lifeless, but recent explorations have discovered a profusion of life forms, collectively called extremophiles, near the numerous hydrothermal vents that break through the seabed and release heat from the Earth's inner core (Grassle 1991). As discussed later, extremophiles have evolved unique mechanisms to survive that most inhospitable environment they populate, mechanisms that may prove extremely useful to humanity.
<section>Marine life</section>
The oceans that cover 71 percent of the earth's surface provide a haven for a multitude of biologically diverse life forms, ranging in size and complexity from the smallest known, the virus, to the very largest, the blue whale. Science has identified and characterized approximately 180,000 species of marine algae, animals, bacteria, fungi and viruses; and it is estimated that more than 800,000 are yet to be discovered. Unpolluted waters everywhere teem with life. It is hard to imagine, for instance, the huge number of krill that at favorable times occupy a given volume of the Antarctic Sea or the multitude of squid that congregate off the coast of California each spring. Nevertheless, the diversity of life found in tropical and subtropical marine waters is greater than in colder waters. These warm, richly endowed waters fall mostly under the jurisdiction of developing countries. In fact, some of the least developed countries may possess potentially the most valuable marine
resources.
Although the basic building blocks of life are the same, the conditions under which marine organisms live and propagate have influenced their evolution, in the process endowing them with biochemical, biophysiological and genetic characteristics that are quite different from those exhibited by terrestrial life. Information about these characteristics, and the organisms that exhibit them, is mostly lacking. For example, scientists estimate that less than 20 percent of terrestrial organism have been closely investigated; the figure for marine organisms is considerably less than 5 percent.
Life forms found in the abyssal depths exhibit especially interesting characteristics. Organisms living near submarine hydrothermal vents have evolved elaborate mechanisms to enable them to flourish in an extreme environment characterized by high pressure, high heat and no light. Unlike animal life on the surface that depends on oxygen for energy and carbon for building material, animals at these extreme marine environments thrive in the methane-sulfide and hydrogen-sulfide rich waters produced by the hydrothermal vents. One interesting survival mechanism, for example, is the unique symbiosis existing between microorganisms and clams, mussels or tube worms. The bivalves pass the methanerich water across their gills, where the methane is picked up and processed by highly specialized bacteria that live only in the gills of this mollusc species. The free methane is thereby made available to the host animal, which uses it as its sole energy source.
The symbiotic relationship between the tube worm and bacteria is even more complicated. The bacterium needs sulfur to survive, while the worm needs methane that the bacterium processes from the seawater. The worm therefore has to pick up hydrogen sulfide from the water and transport it to the bacteria living within its body. Hydrogen sulfide would be toxic to the worm, except for the fact that it has evolved an unusual hemoglobin that binds the chemical and allows the worm's blood to carry it safely to the bacterium (Alper 1990).
<section>Marine environmental damage and destruction</section>
The coastal waters of many developing countries are a haven for a large variety of marine life that provide aquaculturists, fishermen and sailors with opportunities to earn a livelihood, the sports-fishermen with recreation possibilities, and inhabitants in general with an important part of their dietary requirements. However, over the last twenty or thirty years this resource has been severely misused and desecrated. Formerly profitable fisheries for cod, salmon and sardines have gone bankrupt due to overfishing; mangroves in Asia have been destroyed to make way for prawn farming; coastal waters off Africa and
Asia have been polluted by human and slaughterhouse wastes, making them unfit for recreation, attracting sharks and otherwise creating public health hazards; riverain estuaries in Asia and South America, which in the past provided breeding and spawning grounds for an untold number of life forms, have been damaged or killed by agricultural and industrial pollution; and coral reefs throughout the tropical seas, which protect seashores while furnishing shelter for an enormous variety of animals and plants, have been dynamited or poisoned.
Damage to marine biodiversity caused by manmade activities ranges in severity from barely discernible to massive (UNEP 1990). Marine tracts manifesting the heaviest damage are usually located near large population and industrial centers or close to the mining or development of a natural resource, such as oil. Vast marine areas therefore cannot sustain traditional economic activities. Unfortunately, unless governments institute conservation and anti-pollution measures and enforce them, the degradation of crucial ecosystems is certain to continue and the negative effects multiply.
<section>Detecting and monitoring oceanic events</section>
Oceanic events may be detected and monitored via on-site surveys and remote sensing. Each set of technologies has its uses and limitations.
On-site survey
On-site surveys are generally done in one of the following four ways. First, specimens of fish, plankton and other organisms may be directly collected through the use of nets or sampling chambers. Direct sampling allows scientists to identify which life forms populate the site being sampled at a particular time and to estimate population numbers and densities. If scientists are able to collect many samples throughout a wide area and over a longer period of time they may be able to gain an understanding of the distribution patterns of pelagic animals, the nature of interactions between different species, and the social structure of studied animals. Physical samples, such as water and bottom material, can also be collected on-site for analysis of constituent elements and pollutants. The limitations of direct collection are: it is labor intensive; it requires expensive equipment and sophisticated instrumentation, including computers, for thorough analysis; the samples will
always be minute compared to the area or volume being sampled, so that making general hypotheses for the larger area is prone to error; and many important marine areas cannot be adequately sampled because of political, physical or geographical factors.
Second, surveys can be done acoustically. Vessels equipped with acoustic systems can detect schools of finfish and mollusks, including krill, squid and midwater fish. Sophisticated acoustic systems are often able to identify the detected animals. Acoustic systems can be used to improve the efficiency of fisheries by locating and quantifying marine living resources. However, sophisticated acoustic systems are expensive and need trained personnel for their operation. These systems are not able to detect smaller organisms, nor organisms living on the bottom or at great depths.
In the third method of on-site surveying, "sentinel" animals may be used to detect and monitor pollutants, such as heavy metals, polluting chemicals and certain pathogens. These organisms can provide early warning of rising levels of pollutants or increasing number of pathogens, allowing public health officials to institute preventive or corrective measures before dangerous levels are reached. For example, UNEP in cooperation with Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) in 1987 launched the International Mussel Watch experiment to use mussels to detect and monitor chlorinated hydrocarbons. The preparatory phase of the experiment was successful, so a full-scale mussel sentinel program was begun in 1990 and will continue through 1992 (UNEP 1991). There are, however, some limitations to the sentinel animal systems. In particular, sentinel animals will detect only a small number of chemicals and pathogens, many sites will not support the growth of sentinel animals, and
often the detection of a chemical or pathogen is post facto, after disaster has already struck.
The fourth method uses data acquisition buoys that may be tethered at strategic sites to measure physical (wind speed, humidity, wave period and direction), chemical (concentration of salinity, dissolved oxygen and minerals) and biological (concentration of nutrients such as phosphor and sulfur and algal concentrations) parameters (Huglen 1991). The sensors that detect and measure parameters must interface with an operating system that tells the sensors when to turn on and off and that processes data so it can be transmitted to the operator, usually via satellite transmission.
Remote sensing
Remote sensing can be done via satellites or aircraft; and in some instances, the equipment and technique used for data collection and analysis are the same. Aircraft, though, can in addition be used for detailed analogue photography and visual interpretation for pursuit of fish and marine mammals (Baker 1991). Remote sensing equipment generates data on a wide segment of the electromagnetic spectrum, which includes infrared radiometers for measuring the surface temperatures; synthetic aperture radar for wave studies; microwave radiometers for wind speed; and coastal zone color scanners for plankton densities. The remote sensing techniques, when coordinated with surveys done at ground level, allows scientists to determine and measure upwellings (the development of warm and cold water fronts), spot transition zones, and map areas of plankton blooms (NRC 1985). Remote sensing would be a rather expensive endeavor, if it included the cost of deploying sophisticated hardware in
satellites that orbit around the world and installing receiving facilities with elaborate equipment on the ground. However, most of those are now in place and operate on a communal basis. Remote sensing data and images can now be purchased from, for example, LANDSAT or SPOT, but the analysis of data requires special expertise.
While it is true that some of the techniques used, for example remote sensing, are sophisticated and products of high technology, the data collected so far is elementary, limiting possibilities for analysis of such phenomena as climate change, the greenhouse effect and living resource depletion (see Figure 1). While more advanced remote sensing technologies are expected to come on line by the end of the 1990s (see Figure 2), they also will have only limited ability to generate data on marine biodiversity, the productivity of marine organisms, the details of biogeochemical cycling, most of the processes affecting environmental change, the transfer of genes in the oceans, and many other physical and biological occurrences. As is discussed in the following chapters, advanced biotechnology techniques may be used to overcome many of these shortcomings.
<section>Chapter 2</section>
<section>A primer in biotechnology</section>
Biotechnology may be defined as "the application of scientific and engineering principles to the processing of materials by biological agents to provide goods and services." (Bull, Holt and Lilly 1982) Scientific and engineering principles refer in the main to the disciplines of microbiology, biochemistry, genetics, biochemical and chemical engineering. Researchers in traditional applied fields such as agriculture, aquaculture and fisheries, often employ biotechnology techniques to augment traditional procedures. While these are the essential characteristics of biotechnology, a revolutionary advance in the field occurred in the early 1970s, when genetic engineering was first developed. This, in practical terms, marked a new departure for the biosciences and bioengineering. Accordingly, biotechnology techniques developed before 1973 can be considered "classical" techniques, while the many genetic engineering techniques developed during the last twenty years or so can
reasonably be grouped under the heading of "advanced" biotechnology. For this reason, the primer begins with two sections addressing classical and advanced biotechnology. Next, the special promise that biotechnology offers for developing countries is discussed. The chapter ends with two sections on biosafety in the terrestrial and marine environments.
<section>Classical biotechnology</section>
While humans have applied biotechnology throughout history, at certain times "breakthroughs" in research have led to remarkable advances in the field. The discovery by Louis Pasteur in 1857 that fermentation results from the action of microorganisms is a fine example of a breakthrough. Capitalizing on findings from Pasteur's research, industrialists established a biotechnology industry in the early 1900s, which used fermentation to manufacture on a large scale organic chemicals, such as acetone, butanol and ethanol. By 1925, 85 percent of all industrial solvents produced in the United States were manufactured via fermentation, a percentage that dropped drastically after World War II because they were replaced by synthetic processes based on cheap petroleum (Bjurstrom 1985). During World War II chemical engineers developed sophisticated fermentation techniques to mass produce penicillin, followed by other antibiotics. After the war, further advances led to the manufacture of
substances that were difficult to synthesize by chemical methods, such as steroids, enzymes and certain vitamins.
The research carried out by generations of geneticists, biochemists and other bioscientists led to the development of the time - tested techniques of mutation, selection and breeding that drive the conventional biotechnology industry. Some of the recent industrial development programs were immensely successful; for example, the production capability of Penicillium notatum, the microorganism producing penicillin, has increased over 5,000 percent since it was first used in fermentation in the late 1930s.
It is useful to describe a classical industrial biotechnology project, one whose objective is to develop an antibiotic-producing organism. Such an organism may be discovered while screening many different microorganisms recovered from, for instance, a soil sample from a tropical forest or a sponge taken from a coral reef. After screening uncovers an antibiotic-producing organism, chemists assay its ability to produce the antibiotic. The natural (or wild) type organism does not usually release the antibiotic in sufficiently high concentration to be useful for industry. Using low-producing organisms as parents, the industrial researcher develops their progeny to produce greater quantities of the antibiotic than the parent. The first step is usually to expose the parent organism to mutagenic chemicals, ultra-violet light or X-rays. After treatment, microbiologists propagate potential mutants in culture and select those progeny that possess high antibiotic producing ability for
further selective culturing. Each selected strain is thereafter bred in large numbers. Those strains that retain the capacity to produce the antibiotic and that do not exhibit other unwanted characteristics undergo further steps in the process. If development is successful, chemical engineers propagate large numbers of the selected progeny under controlled circumstances in industrial fermenters, where they produce the desired antibiotic in large quantities via fermentation. The team that undertakes R&D projects in classical biotechnology will typically include microbiologists, biochemists, geneticists and fermentation engineers.
Scientists use classical biotechnology techniques to alter the genetic makeup (genotype) of microorganisms, plants and animals for the purpose of changing their physical characteristics (phenotype). Programs using classical techniques may be directed, for example, to develop a faster race horse, a higher-producing cereal plant species, or a superior antibiotic-secreting microorganism strain. But because each operation in these programs affects the entire genome of the target organism, many different genetic recombinations simultaneously occur; some could result in unwanted characteristics appearing. The faster horse may, for example, lack stamina; the higher-producing plant could be disease-prone; or the antibiotic-producing microorganism may prove unsuitable for large-scale propagation. When an undesirable trait appears, a laborious ancillary breeding process called backcrossing is done to eliminate it.
<section>Advanced biotechnology</section>
Advanced biotechnology is usually considered to have begun with the research on animal viruses undertaken by Paul Berg, Herbert Boyer, Stanley Cohen and associates at Stanford University and the University of California, and reported in 1972 and 1973 (Cohen and others 1973; Jackson, Symons and Berg 1972). In these experiments, recombinant DNA (rDNA) methods were developed, enabling the transfer of genetic material, usually one or more genes, from one organism (the donor) to another (the host), where the genetic material became incorporated, or recombined, into the host's genome. Remarkably, the recombined gene retained the same function in the new host as in the donor.
The next significant advance in advanced biotechnology was in 1975 when the Argentinian scientist C. Milstein (at the time working in the United Kingdom) and the Swiss scientist G. Köhler discovered a method for fusing two types of cells: the antibody producing B-cell from animals with a type of cancer cell called myeloma (Köhler and Milstein 1975). The B-cells of an animal are triggered by a foreign substance (called an antigen) and begin producing antibodies. The antibody-producing B-cells are then fused with the cancer cells. The fused cell, or hybridoma, produces a specific antibody called monoclonal antibody against that antigen. Antigens can be a variety of agents or substances: virus, bacteria, a peptide, a sequence of DNA, a polysaccharide, and so on. The monoclonal antibody will attach to the antigen that stimulated its production. This property may be used by scientists to detect specific chemicals or parts of molecular structures, by public health workers to
detect and monitor pathogenic microorganisms and toxic pollutants, and by industry to capture and recover a specific substance from a solution.
Recombinant DNA and hybridoma construction were the first of a series of biotechnology techniques that collectively are now termed genetic engineering. Genetic engineering has been defined by some as the science of manipulating genes and organisms to construct novel biological entities (Stone 1987).
Similar to classical biotechnology, advanced biotechnology is in part driven by breeding and selection. Unlike classical biotechnology, genetic engineering techniques may be employed to develop a novel biological entity (the transgenic organism); once the transgenic organism has been realized, scientists employ breeding and selection to further enhance this organism's characteristics. As before, chemical engineers use fermentation processes for the large-scale production of the wanted protein or metabolite. Scientists from many different disciplines have contributed to the discovery and development of genetic engineering, including biochemists, geneticists, microbiologists, molecular biologists, physiologists and physicists. In addition, fermentation and instrumentation engineers apply research findings to industrial purposes.
While recognizing the long history of biotechnology and the many benefits that classical biotechnology has generated for humanity, advanced biotechnology equips bioscientists with new, powerful tools (UNDP 1989). First, it offers the means for crossing formerly impenetrable genetic barriers that normally prevent crossbreeding between species. Thus genetic engineering can be used to combine desirable characteristics of different species. Industry now uses microorganisms into which human or animal genes have been spliced to produce several specialty pharmaceuticals that were barely known, or were unknown, a few years ago. For example, strains of the bacterium Escherichia cold (E. coli), a microorganism normally found in the gastrointestinal tracts of animals, have had human genes inserted in their genomes. Industry uses genetically engineered E. colt to produce a range of proteins previously unique to the human being, including human insulin and growth hormone. These
achievements could not have been accomplished via classical biotechnology.
Second, genetic engineering can be specific. Once the target organism's genetic makeup has been characterized, bioscientists can target a specific gene or group of genes for their attention. For example, research may be directed at improving the yield of an amino acidproducing microorganism. Once researchers identify the gene coding for the amino acid's sequence it can be defined, then cloned. Next, they insert multiple copies of the gene in the original organism, or in another well characterized organism, perhaps more suitable for industrial purposes. In either case increased production of the amino acid will result. And to the point, only one aspect of the engineered organism's genome will have been manipulated that bearing on amino acid production.
Third, and related to specificity, the results from advanced biotechnology are usually predictable. As noted above, classical breeding often causes unwanted changes or traits because the natural recombination of genes that occurs cannot be predetermined. Conversely, the genetic engineering recombination in a well characterized host takes place according to plan and manipulation. The problem of unwanted changes is minimized and will become more predictable as knowledge advances and techniques are perfected.
Fourth, researchers using advanced biotechnology techniques are able to achieve results sooner than if they had used the classical approach of mutation, breeding and selection. For instance, the development of a high yielding amino acid-producing bacterium through conventional breeding and selection may take several years; the same achievement could be reached within a year through the application of advanced biotechnology techniques.
<section>Biotechnology and developing countries</section>
By now, about twenty years after the discovery of genetic engineering, modern biotechnology clearly holds immense promise for developing countries, both to drive economic development and to provide tools for solving problems related to health, food shortage, and polluted marine and terrestrial environs (BOSTID 1982; UNIDO 1981). Four areas hold especial promise: agriculture, food industry, pharmaceuticals, and industrial chemicals.
Agriculture
Animal husbandry will benefit from the introduction of recombinant vaccines and diagnostic kits based on monoclonal antibodies and DNA probes. Other types of drugs useful to animal husbandry are growth hormones produced by genetically engineered organisms. Plant biotechnologists will improve the growth characteristics of crops important to developing countries by endowing them with improved disease resistance, improving their nutritional value, enhancing their ability to withstand drought and heat or to grow in soils that have been damaged by agrochemicals or that contain high concentrations of certain metals or minerals. Applications from marine biotechnology, as will be discussed below, are likely to have uses in terrestrial agriculture. For example, fish genes that code for anti-freezing proteins may be inserted in plants, allowing them to resist frost and to retain their culinary properties after freezing and thawing.
Food industry
Genetic engineering is already making an impact on the food industry. To illustrate, formerly the only supply of rennin, an expensive substance vital to cheese making, was the calf rumen. Now genetically engineered bacteria mass-produce it. Improved availability of rennin to cheese manufacturers means that they have more dependable supplies, are able to improve the quality control of the final product, and can lower the cost of production.
The possibility of building on existing traditional methods used to produce fermented foods and beverages also has relevance for developing countries. For example, the food industry supports research on the genetics of lactic acid fermenting bacteria to enrich the flavor and nutritive content of fermented food staples. In another example, inedible biomass may be used as a substrate for the production of single cell protein that, in turn, could be used as a nutritive additive in livestock feed.
As is discussed below, marine biotechnology in general has much relevance to the food industry because marine organisms are sources for many natural food additives, such as preservatives, thickeners, supplements and emulsifiers.
Pharmaceuticals
Industry produces about 80 percent of all pharmaceuticals via chemical synthesis or by extraction from animal and plant tissues. Biological methods, usually fermentation, are used to produce the remaining 20 percent of prescription drugs. The proportion of fermentation-produced drugs will increase dramatically in the next ten to twenty years as the new biotechnology techniques replace classical production methods. In addition, as mentioned, unique pharmaceuticals produced by genetically engineered organisms are creating new niches in the drug market. To illustrate, at present approximately a dozen genetically engineered drugs have reached the market and are generating an estimated $2 billion income, but by 2000 the value of genetically engineered drugs is likely to exceed $10 billion. New drugs of particular importance to developing countries are: diagnostic kits based on monoclonal antibodies and DNA probes (see page 48 and following) that enable doctors to rapidly detect
and diagnosis an infectious disease; and recombinant vaccines that can prevent catastrophic diseases, such as malaria, hepatitis, human and livestock trypanosomiasis and schistosomiasis. In fact, two recombinant hepatitis B vaccines are already in use. Others, including vaccines against dengue fever and herpes, are likely to become available within five to ten years. The benefits of a recombinant vaccine over traditional ones are that they are safer (because they do not contain any parts of pathogenic materials), remain stable at ambient temperatures, and promise to be cheaper.
Industrial chemicals
Approximately 90 percent of the substrates used to synthesize chemicals are petroleum based. For the many petroleum-importing countries the replacing of chemical synthesis by fermentation processes could have several beneficial effects. Fermentation occurs at lower temperatures and pressures than chemical reactions, thus saving energy and generating much less toxic pollution. Biotechnology also can be adapted to use locally available renewable natural resources, such as algae, agricultural and forestry wastes, and specific crops to produce useful starting materials for many industrial chemicals, such as sugars, methane and alcohols. Fermentation processes adapted to use genetically engineered microorganisms are producing single cell protein and certain amino acids, both valued as feed additives in animal husbandry. Much work is going into developing microorganisms that destroy manmade toxic residues and substances (including petroleum and synthetic chemicals) in soil and
marine environments.
While the promise of biotechnology should not be exaggerated and the difficulty of building capability is considerable, entry into this field by developing countries is more readily accomplished than into any other high technology field (Swaminathan 1991). For that reason and also because most tropical and semitropical developing countries possess enormous natural resources amenable to development via biotechnology, their decisionmakers would be remiss in failing to consider building capability in this field.
<section>Safety and biotechnology</section>
After the introduction of rDNA technology, concerns arose about its safety. The major worry was that an accidental or chance recombination of genes would alter the bacterial host, endowing it with undesirable characteristics. The public, reflecting uncertainties by scientists, voiced their concerns about several aspects of biotechnology. Could an entirely new life form with unknown characteristics be created by researchers? Could otherwise innocuous bacteria accidentally become endowed with pathogenic properties during research and escape from research laboratories? Could new recombinant forms of virus and bacteria cause pandemics of unique diseases among man, animals or plants?
Laboratory safety
Most bioscientists believed that the possibility of such events were small, but no hard data existed to buttress this conclusion. In 1975, reflecting the depth of public concerns and considering the lack of information on the subject, scientists from throughout the world met in Asilomar, California (USA), to assess the risks of rDNA technology. The conclusions of the Asilomar conference were used by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) to formulate a set of guidelines. These NIH guidelines for rDNA research were first published in 1976, but have since then been revised several times. Initially, the NIH guidelines:
* required total containment for rDNA experiments and set forth the conditions under which research could take place. These ranged from the least secure condition, termed Biosafety Level 1 (BL1) to high security containment, or BL4. Some types of experiments were not allowed. BL1 and BL2 work require mostly common sense procedures, such as cleaning work surfaces, wearing laboratory smocks, and washing hands frequently. These precautionary measures may be grouped under the rubric of good laboratory practices that any well-run hospital clinical or research laboratory would routinely follow. Research considered especially risky could only be carried out in BL4 facilities: self-contained units with entrance only through air-locks and with all access rigidly controlled. All workers in a BL4 laboratory must be specially trained in the handling of extremely hazardous infectious agents and must wear protective clothing (resembling space suits) when working.
* created a national Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), headquartered at the NIH, that reviews proposals for projects requiring the use of BL3 and BL4 facilities and adjust the NIH guidelines in view of new scientific knowledge.
* require each institution receiving government funds to set up and maintain an Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC), which has the initial responsibility for reviewing research proposals involving rDNA experiments presented by local researchers and specifying the conditions under which these should take place. Some difficult problems that require policy decisions are referred to the RAC.
Although they were binding only on researchers funded by the NIH, the entire United States scientific establishment quickly accepted the NIH guidelines. Simultaneously, the United Kingdom established the Genetic Manipulation Advisory Group (GMAG), which formulated voluntary guidelines for British scientists. Soon, many other countries adopted either the NIH or GMAG guidelines for their own use or formulated national guidelines that were adapted from guidelines existing elsewhere.
With the enactment of the NIH and GMAG guidelines, scientists began to perform a series of risk assessment experiments to try deliberately to create pathogens. These confirmed that the possibility of accidentally creating pathogens in the laboratory was infinitesimal. They also proved that certain laboratory procedures could be made safer when genetic engineering was employed. Specifically, when handling virulent viruses, scientists using genetic engineering techniques could safely enclose viral particles in innocuous bacteria, something that could not be done with conventional means. For example, during hepatitis B research it is safer to enclose bits of the virus genome within an innocuous organism than to handle directly the whole virus as is done in conventional research.
Beyond directed risk assessment experiments, actual practice has demonstrated the adequacy of the NIH guidelines. Since the NIH guidelines first came into effect about sixteen years ago thousands of research projects have been conducted throughout the world in the agricultural, biological, industrial, medical, microbiological and other fields apparent negative side effects. This safety record indicates that genetic engineering techniques are safe.
There are three major reasons for the safety of rDNA research. First, the successful invasion, colonization and infection by a parasite that causes disease in the host is a complex process. Not only is the number of genes required to initiate infection large, but also the interactions between these many genes are to a considerable extent dependent on their locations in a three-dimensional space. The probability of recreating this complex milieu by accident when manipulating only one or a few genes is minute. Second, genes include regulatory DNA sequences, called operons, that control in a positive or negative way the expression of the gene in each particular cell. It is difficult to imagine how these exceedingly specific operons for disease-associated genes could be accidentally created. Third, the insertion of alien genes in a microorganism usually weakens that organism in some way, diminishing its ability to compete with wild organisms or to survive the many stresses of
natural conditions outside the laboratory.
As data accumulated proving the safety of biotechnology research, the RAC progressively relaxed the NIH guidelines. Since the late 1970s public fears about rDNA research in contained situations, such as laboratories, have largely disappeared. Other concerns, however, have surfaced about biotechnology applications, specifically, the use of products produced by genetically engineered organisms and the deliberate release of genetically engineered organisms into the environment.
Product safety
Industry markets numerous products made by genetically engineered organisms, including human insulin, human growth hormone, various animal growth hormones, interferons and others. By now it is clear that the safety aspects of these products do not differ from similar products produced by conventional means. In fact, biosafety regulatory programs in the United States, the European Community and elsewhere assess inanimate products from advanced biotechnology on the same basis as products from conventional research and development. This is also the conclusion of WHO. For example, WHO would test a vaccine the same way, whether it was developed and produced using rDNA technology or a conventional cell culture system. No country to date has enacted new regulations aimed specifically at inanimate biotechnology products.
Deliberate release
The second concern, about deliberate release, has stimulated several studies to identify and quantify the risks associated with introducing genetically engineered organisms into the environment. The two major risks of deliberate release are: (1) direct harm to the environment or any of its inhabitants, and (2) dispersal of the introduced organism and integration of its genes into the genomes of nontarget organisms.
NRC guidelines
The U.S. National Research Council (NRC) has scrutinized the issues related to the field testing of genetically engineered microbes or plants in terrestrial situations and concluded that there are three essential criteria for evaluating the risks associated with a proposed release (NRC 1989):
* Are we familiar with the properties of the organism and the environment into which it may be introduced?
* Can we confine or control the organism effectively?
* What are the probable effects on the environment should the introduced organism, or a genetic trait it carries, persist longer than intended or spread to nontarget organisms?
Specific methods for safely managing the field testing of genetically engineered organisms are in a state of evolution. In the United States, proposals for testing genetically engineered organisms in the field are dealt with on a caseby-case basis. In general, however, the process is as follows. For any proposal, a thorough environmental impact assessment is conducted. The assessment addresses health and safety concerns by considering both direct and indirect effects stemming from the proposed release. It must convincingly show that the proposed release would probably not significantly alter or harm any aspect of the environment or its biota. Permission for testing probably would not be granted if the organism to be tested was likely to present high risk to non-target animals or plants; for example, because it possessed characteristics such as enhanced fitness, increased pathogenicity, or contained novel phenotypes. If the project is judged to have a negligible impact on the
environment, this finding is widely publicized before a final decision is made in order to give the public and its representatives an opportunity to scrutinize the environmental impact assessment report and to comment on it. The regulating agency must take these comments, as well as statements made by other interested parties, into account before it makes its decision. At the time of this report, U.S. regulatory agencies have given final approval to over 400 field trials of genetically engineered organisms, including a transgenic fish (see below). No negative effects have so far been observed, indicating that the safety procedures seem to be working, at least in the short term (Miller, Burris and Vidaver 1991). (Field tests throughout the world are recorded in an OECD database called Biotrack Information System. As of this writing, Biotrack has data on 650 field tests with no evidence of negative side effects.)
Case study: transgenic carp
The three NRC criteria are central to the framework for risk evaluation in terrestrial situations and would apply equally to any proposed release of genetically engineered organisms into the marine or freshwater environments. It is illustrative to consider the one field test involving transgenic fish in light of these criteria. To do this we need to review the events that preceded the decision to allow the test and to scrutinize the conditions under which this test is being performed.
The fish in question is a carp containing a trout growth hormone gene. The transgenic carp was developed by a team from the Center of Marine Biotechnology (Maryland), Stanford University (California) and Auburn University (Alabama) (Chen and Powers 1990). At the end of 1989, the team requested the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) to allow it to grow the transgenic carp in outdoor ponds to learn whether the foreign gene affects the reproductive capacity of the carp, whether the carp's offspring will inherit the foreign gene, and whether the offspring will develop and behave as do the offspring from "normal" carp. This research would be generally useful for improving the carp's genetic characteristics for aquaculture. The field test proposal was strenuously opposed by various environmental groups, including the Foundation on Economic Trends and the National Wildlife Federation, on grounds that carp have a significant potential to damage insects, plants and other fish in
fresh water habitats. In view of the questions raised, the initial proposal was remanded and its drafters were asked to provide more and better information about possible environmental impacts.
About six months later, the principal investigators submitted a redrafted proposal to the USDA. It asked for permission to raise 50,000 fry that had been spawned from nine transgenic carp in ten outdoor pools. After three months, the number of fry would be reduced to 300 per pond; these would be marked for identification and studied for the next fifteen months. The fish would then be destroyed, before they reached sexual maturity. The ponds stocking the fish would be wellprotected and would have no connection to any other waterways.
After some months of public hearings and deliberations, the USDA determined that the "...experiment with transgenic carp presents no significant risks to the environment" (Transgenic fish 1990). It gave approval for the experiment to proceed, and actual testing began in June.
For the purpose of this report, it is useful to review the conditions of the field testing of the transgenic carp in view of the three NRC criteria. First, in scientific terms, carp is probably the most studied and wellcharacterized of all fish species. The insertion of a trout growth hormone gene would not change its physical properties, except that bearing on growth. Whether the alien gene would change carp behavior is of course being tested. Since the testing is in effect being carried out in a closed, artificial system, the environment into which the transgenic carp is being introduced is known. For these reasons, the first criterion is largely satisfied. Second, unless a deliberate, criminal attempt was made to release them, the conditions under which the testing of the transgenic carp is taking place precludes the possibility of their escaping. So certainly the second criterion is satisfied; the tested organism is confined and controlled effectively. The third
criterion is not applicable since the test conditions preclude persistence or spread.
The field testing of the transgenic carp is so circumscribed and controlled it more resembles testing in a closed system than true field testing. Nevertheless, it probably is a model for the initial field testing of any aquatic animal or plant. As such, it is elaborate and expensive, hardly an undertaking for most developing countries. (Safety considerations as they relate specifically to marine biotechnology are discussed at length in the next section.)
International guidelines
During the last few years, safety aspects of biotechnology has become a subject of interest and concern by policymakers on the international level. The OECD has formulated biotechnology guidelines to guide its member nations; guidelines appropriate for developing countries have been elaborated by a working group established jointly by the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), UNEP, UNIDO and WHO (UNIDO 1991). These guidelines may be used by governments as models for local laws. Although it is too early to make a definite determination, the increasing involvement of international organizations in the biosafety issue may indicate a new trend; that is, governments may be willing to manage biosafety through international cooperative efforts. (This approach makes sense since a genetically engineered microbe, plant or fish after release or escape is not likely to respect national boundaries.)
While these efforts by international agencies are helpful, a difficult problem still faces governments of developing countries, because expertise in risk assessment and communication is necessary in order for them to adapt foreign guidelines and regulations to fit local circumstances. However, these skills are typically scarce or lacking in developing countries. Local scientists and regulators should therefore be encouraged to acquire them, but opportunities to do so are rare. Unlike the many training slots available to learn, for example, advanced biotechnology techniques, risk assessment is not part of most universities' curriculum. To some extent, this gap is being filled by a few U.N. agencies. For example, the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) and UNEP initiated a joint program on biosafety in 1991 (Practical course 1991). Its two initial activities consisted of courses offered in Trieste to researchers from developing countries: a
three-day course, "Genetically Modified Organisms: Safety in the Laboratory and the Environment" (July 1991) attended by thirty scientists; and a subsequent three-day course, "Genetically Modified Organisms for the 1990s," with fifty participants. Topics included biological risk assessment, containment of genetically-modified organisms in the laboratory and the field, recommended procedures for safe laboratory and industrial practices, transgenic animals, and analysis of existing biosafety legislation. The objective of these courses is to help scientists and regulators from developing countries gain sufficient skills in risk assessment and risk management so they can return to their home countries and adapt these methodologies to fit local circumstances and conditions.
It bears mentioning at this point that there is some concern that the biotechnology industry will be a threat to producers of natural products. For example, in industrial countries cell culture systems that will mass produce natural products, such as agar, saffron and vanilla, have been developed. The fear is that natural products will be displaced by biotechnology production systems, hurting the economies of the developing countries that produce and export them. Similarly, European farmers have protested against the use of recombinant bovine somatotropin in animal husbandry, claiming that it would result in an overproduction of milk. While these are important socio-economic problems that need to be addressed by governments when they formulate policies for biotechnology research, development and applications, they have nothing to do with the safety of these activities.
<section>Biosafety and marine biotechnology</section>
As marine biotechnology develops and advances, questions inevitably arise about its safety. In answer to this concern, explicit precedents cannot be found because of its short history, but applicable lessons can be drawn from recent experience in the two fields that give rise to marine biotechnology-general biotechnology and certain marine applications. Accordingly, the next sections: (1) consider biosafety issues that biotechnology in general has generated and analyze them in terms of their relevance to marine biotechnology; (2) analyze special characteristics of the marine environment that bear on biosafety; (3) scrutinize introductions of exotic aquatic organisms into new environs; and (4) assess whether marine biotechnology poses different safety and regulatory issues from those in terrestrial biotechnology.
Biosafety issues in terrestrial biotechnology
In the preceding sections it was seen that biotechnology research raises one set of concerns, biotechnology products another. Each requires reflection to gain a perspective on the possible biohazards they may generate.
BlOTECH RESEARCH AND BlOSAFETY. As discussed above, national guidelines that regulate biotechnology research generally focus on containment and are voluntarily followed by scientists. The guidelines vary stringency of conditions under which research may proceed depending on the level of risk believed inherent to the organism being researched. When scientists work with a virulent pathogen they must do so in a high security laboratory and use elaborate procesures to ensure the safety of themselves, other workers, and the surrounding community. Conversely, research involving a non-pathogen usually requires no more than good laboratory practices. It is probable that over 95 percent of all biotechnology research is being done under the conditions defined by good laboratory practices.
While marine and terrestrial organisms may differ markedly in chemical and physiological characteristics, the conditions under which scientists conduct research are analogous in marine biotechnology and terrestrial biotechnology. This is so because researchers in one field will be trained much like their counterparts in the other; marine molecular biology employs the same techniques as does terrestrial molecular biology; and the laboratories where R&D in both fields are performed are similar, as is their equipment and reagents. Furthermore, having researchers investigating a marine organism and a terrestrial organism in the same lab does not in itself create a special situation. The health and safety issues posed by marine biotechnology research performed in the closed system of a laboratory therefore can be expected to be similar to those posed by comparable terrestrial biotechnology research. For these reasons, the voluntary guidelines that govern biotechnology research
generally are also expected to be pertinent to and adequate for marine biotechnology research. To date, scientists, public advocates and regulators seem to be in agreement on this point.
BlOTECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS AND Advanced biotechnology research can produce two types of products-inanimate products and genetically altered living organisms. Each poses important questions, such as: Do inanimate products produced by genetically engineered organisms pose risks (to humans, other animals or plants) above and beyond those posed by conventionally produced products? Would the deliberate release of genetically engineered organisms into the environment pose a hazard to existing life forms or the environment?
Concerning the first question, most inanimate products from biotechnology are known chemicals or compounds produced via fermentation. However, rDNA technology has enabled the mass production of new products, such as human and other animal growth hormones, interferons and interleukens, which in turn have generated new marketing niches, changed the way we regard intellectual property and, at times, created ethical dilemmas. No biotechnology product is known to have caused unique hazards. The main lesson from the experience gained by governmental and intergovernmental agencies when dealing with inanimate products, regardless of how exotic they are, is that the testings of these products need not differ from that of conventionally produced products; the same criteria of safety and efficacy apply equally to both. The strictness of the testing protocol will, of course, depend on the product's intended use. If the product is intended for animal or plant use, or is a nonconsumable
commodity, its testing would not be so rigorous. However, if the product is a human drug, its testing would follow exacting procedures, including clinical phases. Summing up, so far governments have met concerns about the safety of inanimate biotechnology products by promulgating regulations that specify testing of the product and that establish mechanisms for monitoring the testing procedures.
The chemical structures and other characteristics of existing products from marine biotechnology are the same or similar to known compounds from the terrestrial environment, although some have unique structures. As more organisms from extreme environments are collected, screened and investigated, uncommon compounds, showing antibiotic, antiviral, anti-tumor and other properties, will be found. However, if the experience of terrestrial biotechnology is a guide, no matter how unique a product from marine biotechnology is, it is unlikely to create a novel situation, or uncommon hazard, that demands a new regulatory regime. For example, if a unique marine toxin is discovered, its physiological action is not likely to differ markedly from that of a known toxin; neither will its toxicity be significantly greater than known toxins. Therefore, testing done according to established procedures would unravel the chemical structure of the new compound, explain its mode of action and,
eventually, clarify its effectiveness and safety. Similarly, when a fish recombinant killedvaccine is developed, its field testing would most likely follow established animal vaccine testing procedures; testing would be satisfactorily monitored by existing national regulatory authorities. Consequently, present protocols for testing products produced via conventional or advanced biotechniques are appropriate for use in the testing of marine biotechnology products. These procedures can be improved on, perhaps because they do not uncover all of the properties inherent to a compound being tested, but this does not create special conditions or hazards.
The second question, the one that bears on the deliberate release issue, is problematic. No one has yet proposed the testing of a genetically modified organisms in the marine environment. Nevertheless, such a proposal could soon be submitted so it is not too early to consider the problems that it could generate. To do so adequately, the special characteristics of the marine environment must first be examined because they will determine how marine organisms and discrete genetic material (for example, plasmids and naked DNA) disperse.
Special characteristics of the marine environment that bear on biosafety
One of the most important characteristics of oceans is that they, like the atmosphere, are continuous-there are therefore no geographic or geological barriers preventing the spread of introduced organisms. Further, except for the abyssal depths, ocean water is never static; eddies, currents and wind are forever creating movement. The continuity of oceans and the movement of water favor dispersal of organisms, whether by accident or design (as noted in the previous section). But an additional characteristic favors, if not the dispersal of whole organisms, of genetic material. This characteristic is that oceans are mostly watersalt water. Salt water is a medium that is kind to life, preserving the viability of immersed organisms and, at times, parts of organisms by preventing desiccation and deflecting deadly ultraviolet light.
Organisms, and their parts, suspended in water and in ceaseless motion can easily come into direct contact with other organisms and diverse suspended matter, creating possibilities for the dispersal of genes via one of three mechanisms: conjugation, transduction and transformation.
CONJUGATION. For conjugation to take place (that is, for two cells to directly interact to exchange genetic material), the cells have to be related. Thus, conjugations works efficiently between two E. cold cells; fairly efficiently between two species in the family Enterobacteriaceae, say E. cold and Salmonella; but not at all or very inefficiently between, for example, bacteria and yeast. The exotic bacterium could possibly thus pass on the alien gene to a wild bacterium through conjugation. Little is actually known about conjugation among marine bacterial species, but it is reasonable to believe that dispersal by conjugation would be more likely in water populated by high numbers of bacteria due to contamination by sewage and human wastes than in blue ocean water.
TRANSDUCTION. The second mechanism is transduction, where a vector transfers the genetic material from one cell to another. For example, the bacterial species Agrobacterium tumefaciens is a useful vector for transferring genes into many plant species; simple viruses, called bacteriophages (or phage for short), may transfer genes into bacteria (phages are specific, one type of phage will attack only a specific bacterial species). Results from recent research demonstrates that an immense number of viruses and viral particles populate the ocean surface layer (Proctor and Fuhrman 1990; Suttle, Chan and Cottrell 1990). Measurements show that one milliliter of surface water contains between 107 and 109 viruses, which means that the one millimeter thick surface layer of the world's oceans would contain a total of 3.6 x 103° viruses (An ocean of viruses 1990). The role of viruses in the marine environment is unknown, although it is believed that most of them are phages, attacking
species of marine bacteria, microalgae, plankton and other organisms.
TRANSFORMATION. The third mechanism is transformation, where a plasmid or naked DNA is taken up by a cell from the immediate environment. Transformation usually occurs in the laboratory, where the researcher creates the chemical environment (media) conducive to the reaction in a contained vessel. Transformations appear to be exceptional phenomena in the atmospheric and terrestrial environments; little is known about the dispersal of genes via transformation in the media that is ocean water.
The dispersal of marine organisms and their sequel
Past examples of dispersals of marine organisms beyond their natural boundaries provide us with information that can be utilized to consider the dispersal of a genetically engineered marine organism, should one escape in the course of field testing. There are two types of dispersals; invasion and introduction.
Biological invasion is "the arrival, establishment, and subsequent diffusion of species in a community in which they did not previously exist in historical times." (Carlton 1989) Invasion usually results from range expansion, which is the dispersal of the organism by natural mechanisms. This phenomenon has not been studied extensively in the marine environment and, therefore, it is not yet understood. Since so little is known about the range expansion of wild species, no predictions can be made about the range expansion of an organism, whether genetically engineered or not, introduced into a site by human activity. This lack of scientific data creates problems for risk assessors; problems that cannot be resolved until much basic research has been done to clarify this phenomenon.
Introduction is the accidental or deliberate dispersal of organisms through human activities (Carlton 1989). With the introduction of sailing, people have by chance or accident altered aqueous habitats throughout the world's oceans, rivers and lakes. Ships have carried organisms from one place to another in their ballasts, encrusted on their hulls, and bored in their wooden hulls. The openings of interoceanic and interlake canals have given organisms added opportunities to migrate. Traders have carried crustaceans, fish and mollusks long distances from fishing grounds to market places. Pathogens that afflict these fishery products have been carried along (Carlton 1989). Marine species numbering in the thousands have thus been moved across the globe in innumerable patterns since transoceanic trading commenced.
Besides accidental invasions, humans have deliberatively introduced species to foreign locations as part of efforts to develop aquaculture and fisheries, as they have cultivated agriculture on land. Introductions have occurred in waves throughout the 20th century (Welcomme 1986), possibly in response to the changing tastes of consumers and as a result of the breeding of new, more desirable fish, shellfish and crustacean strains. Thus, in the 1950s and 1960s there were large-scale deliberate introductions of fish and shellfish throughout developing countries. Introductions included the African Tilapia to Asia and Latin America; Indian major carps to Southeast Asia and Latin America; the mosquito larva-eating fish Gambusia affinis and Lebistes reticulatus through areas of the world where malaria is endemic; and the black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) and the white shrimp (Penaeus orientalis) throughout Asia and some Latin American countries. In the late 1970s and early 1980s,
large-scale introduction included striped bass (Morone saxatilis) to the U.S. west coast; the Japanese oyster (Crassostrea gigas) to the U.S. and Canadian west coasts and to France; Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus species) to Atlantic waters; the pink salmon (O. gorbuscha) to the Arctic Sea coast of Russia; a shrimp species from Panama (Penaeus stylirostris) to Hawaii; and the Pacific seaweed (Undaria pinnatifida) to France (Sindermann 1986; Welcomme 1986). More recently, in 1989, the macroalgal species Euchema spinosum have been introduced from the Philippines to Zanzibar, where it is used as a food conditioner.
Many of the deliberate introductions have benefitted local populations and improved the economies of countries. For example, France harvests over 100,000 tons of the Pacific oyster; the introduced fish Limnothrissa yields about 4,000 tons from Lake Kivu and 12,000 tons from Lake Kariba; and Sri Lanka's entire inland aquaculture production of 32,000 tons consists of introduced fish and crustaceans (Sindermann 1986; Welcomme 1986). The value of malaria larva-eating fish cannot be estimated, but it likely is immense.
On the debit side, like introduced species on land, aquatic introduced species have caused damage ranging in severity from barely discernible to serious. The mosquito larva-eating fish may eat eggs and larva of other fish; the grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) transmits a cestode-caused fish disease; the Pacific seaweed Sargassum muticum was inadvertently introduced with C. gigas and eventually grew so dense along the English and French coasts of the English Channel that it interferes with other uses; and the widely introduced shrimp Penaeus vannamei in 1981 was found to be the carrier of the pathogen infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus, which has decimated shrimp aquaculture facilities throughout the Pacific rim countries.
Sometimes an introduction appears successful initially, but it proves the reverse over the long term. Two examples of deliberate introductions, undertaken with the best of intentions, that ended up disastrously have particular relevance to developing countries. One is the example of the introduction of the Nile perch Lates niloticus into Lake Victoria during the 1950s. The fish established itself and in a few years local fishermen seemed to benefit as they harvested 60,000 tons of the fish per year. But in the 1980s harvests declined and scientists discovered that as Lates niloticus colonized Lake Victoria waters, it eliminated native cichlid fish stocks found nowhere else. In addition, the only practical way of preserving perch harvests proved to be smoking, which demanded great quantities of wood, which in turn increased the cutting of bushes and trees and led to deforestation. By now it is clear that the introduction of the Nile perch was destructive to aquatic and
terrestrial biodiversity, while the economic return from the introduction could not be sustained.
The second case is the introduction in 1980 of the golden snail (Pomacea species) into the Philippines. The reason for introducing it was to provide farmers with an alternative "crop," the gourmet escargot, which could be used locally for food and exported for cash. The export market never developed, however, and local consumption is low. The snail meanwhile thrives in the rice fields, where it turned into a pest, attacking newly transplanted rice plants and seed and destroying up to 80 percent of the harvest. By the end of 1991, 426,000 hectares of Philippine rice fields had been infested by the snail, which is resistant to pesticides and other control measures. The International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), headquartered in the Philippines, is trying to develop the integrated use of chemicals, biological control measures and farming methods to control the snail (Lessons 1992).
The foregoing indicates that the extent of long-term damage from accidental or deliberate introductions of exotic animal species into the marine environment often cannot be reliably assessed at the time of introduction; nor is it possible to determine with certainty whether the benefits stemming from deliberate introductions ultimately will outweigh costs. More specifically, any or all of the following problems may result from introductions:
o An introduced animal may disrupt local fauna through competition or predation. In the worst case, the introduction of an exotic species may lead to the extinction of the wild species.
o Genetic degradation of the host stock may result from its introduction into a new locale. Conversely, important genes may be lost if the exotic species displaces or replaces the wild species.
o An introduction may lead to a loss of population identity. In other words, when an introduced species breeds with the wild species inhabiting a locale, the adaptations for survival that the wild species have evolved may become diluted or disappear in hybrid progeny.
o New diseases may be introduced along with the deliberate introduction of a stock.
o The introduced species may disrupt the local aquatic community, leading to the degradation of the immediate environment (Welcomme 1986).
o Once an introduced organism colonizes a locale, it may be impossible to eliminate.
In view of the problems that dispersal of marine organisms have engendered throughout the world, governments and international agencies have sought to prevent future problems and to alleviate existing ones through the adoption and implementation of codes and rules. One of the most important of these is the Revised Code of Practice to Reduce Risks for adverse Effects Arising from Introductions and Transfer of Marine Species adopted by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) in 1973 (and revised in 1979). Other codes of practices, position statements and conventions on the subject have been made by the American Fisheries Society (1973), the U.N. Conference on the Law of the Sea (1982), the Council of Europe (1984), FAO's European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (1984) and the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (1987). The overriding objective of these codes and statements is to direct concerted international action
toward preventing accidental introductions and adverse effects from deliberate introductions.
Due to the uneven implementation of the ICES code by nations, Dr. Carl Sindermann has suggested strategies for dealing with future proposals for introductions. The overriding strategy is for U.N. agencies and nongovernmental organizations to educate the public, policymakers and national regulatory agency personnel about the potential damage that the importation of a non-indigenous species can do to native stocks and the local environment. Countries will thus learn that it is in their best economic interest to have a strong regulatory regime to prevent unauthorized introductions and to delineate the conditions under which authorized introductions may proceed. Another strategy is suggested for larger, industrial countries. It emphasizes regional approaches to controlling the transfer of organisms, where the federal government ensures uniformity and continuity.
Whatever approach is adopted, it should be implemented according to the general operating principles set forth in the ICES code. These are based on the assumption that risks from introductions are never zero. This being so, national regulatory regimes should be designed so as to minimize risks from proposed introduction.
Risk reduction includes the thorough study of the organism proposed for introduction in its native habitat; consideration of developing native stocks as an alternative to introducing a new stock; and establishment of mechanisms for monitoring the introduced stock continuously. It is particularly important that the scientific implications of a proposed introduction be analyzed before the event, including clarifying ecological considerations (such as competition and predation); genetic considerations (including potential for hybridization and change in gene frequency); behavioral consideration (including interactions between the introduced and native species); and pathological considerations (including the possibility that the introduced species will carry along with it new infectious diseases) (Sindermann 1986).
Comparison of terrestrial and marine biotechnology
Does marine biotechnology pose different safety and regulatory issues from terrestrial biotechnology? As was discussed previously, marine biotechnology research does not, neither does inanimate products from marine biotechnology. Present risk assessment and management schemes, as well as existing regulations, seem to adequately cover these areas of marine biotechnology.
The difference, then, is in field testing of genetically engineered organisms. As noted, USDA has given permission for the field testing in enclosed ponds of only one genetically engineered aquatic organism - a transgenic carp; and because that testing is being carried out in a closed system, it does not have much relevance to a future field testing in the marine environment. Here the tester and the regulator faces special problems not faced by those performing field testing in closed chambers, because it may be impossible to secure the biological isolation of the organisms being tested. Biological isolation cannot be guaranteed because of the three characteristics of the marine environment the continuity of the oceans, the perpetual motion of the water and suspended particles, and the potential for gene dispersion via unfamiliar biological mechanisms. Further, the lesson learned in the past from dispersals of exotic organisms is that if and when the marine organisms being
tested escapes, the consequences are incalculable.
Referring again to the field testing of the transgenic carp, rather than consider the conditions of the field test itself, it is perhaps more useful for our purposes to speculate on the consequences of a successful test; that is, if the tests convincingly demonstrate that the standard culturing of the transgenic carp is more cost-effective than culturing present stocks, what then? One conceivable scenario is that someone would try to take advantage of the higher performing characteristics of the transgenic fish by intensively culturing them in cages or pens emplaced in a lake or a river. The possibility of some transgenic fish escaping would be high. What would be the consequences of an escape?
Referring to the six possible problems that past introductions have caused, the consequences can range in severity from no effect or minimal to severe. If past experience of terrestrial field testing of organisms that had a single gene inserted in their genome is a guide, no ill effects would result. However, we cannot completely discount the possibility that the escape may trigger a low probability, high consequence sequel, such as the following scenario: ...the dangers of genetic manipulations should be recognized, and biotechnology may prove to be as much a threat to natural species and genetic diversity as it is a justification for maintaining that diversity. The release of individuals with artificially composed genetic makeups into wild populations of the same species could upset the natural distribution of that species as well as the competitive interactions with other species, destabilizing natural biological communities (Thorpe-Miller and Catena 1991).
The field testing of a transgenic fish is not likely to be proposed in the short term if for no other reasons than technical ones. According to Dr. A. Kapuscinski, who works for the Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, University of Minnesota, technical barriers must be overcome and environmental risks reduced before transgenic fish can be cultured (Kapuscinski 1990). The technical barriers relate to the cost-effective transfer of valuable genes and promoters into large numbers of fish; the ready identification of transformed individuals among the treated group; and the selective breeding of transformed fish to develop superior progeny. She estimates that it will take a minimum of 10 years to overcome these technical barriers.
Once technical barriers have been overcome, the major means by which risks related to transgenic fish may be reduced could be to sterilize all fish slated for outgrowth in culture. Fish may be sterilized by two methods. First, certain hormones can be administered to fish embryos, which render them sterile. Researchers do not favor this method since it cannot achieve 100 percent sterilization and hormonal residues may contaminate foodfish. Second, fish eggs can be treated so the progeny are triploid; that is, each fish carries three sets of chromosomes rather than two (see page 28). Triploids are sterile. For added safety, triploid induction can be combined with further treatment that produces an all female progeny. Triploid females are 100 percent nonfertile.
Kapuscinski points out that even if only sterile transgenic fish are cultured, some risk remains because of the necessity to maintain transgenic broodstock. The answer is to maintain broodstock in secure containment facilities, and to educate everyone who works with them of the ecological problems that have resulted from introductions of exotic fish species in the past.
Of course, transgenic organisms other than transgenic fish may be the first candidate for field testing. In view of the research that has already be done to genetically engineer bacteria (for bioremediation) and microalgae (for increased production of food additives), they rather than multi-celled animals should be considered as the primary candidates for the first marine field testing. Further support for this contention comes from the report that the firm Envirogen Inc. in New Jersey is preparing a proposal for the field testing of a bacterium that has been genetically engineered to improve its ability to degrade the industrial pollutant trichlorethylene. Reportedly, the Envirogen proposal will be presented to the EPA sometime during 1992 (First rDNA 1991).
The initial "field testing" of a genetically engineered bioremediating bacterium would probably be done in a closed system, similar to the one used for the testing of the transgenic carp. The strain to be tested may be "weakened" so it would not survive in the wild should it escape. Parameters that could be tested in a closed system include survivability outside the laboratory, ability of the organism to degrade trichlorethylene under various conditions and in the presence of sundry chemicals, and whether synergism is possible between the tested organisms and other microorganisms. Such responsible testing would not likely endanger man or environment.
The field testing of a transgenic bacterium, and other microorganisms, should for the present not be done in an open system. For one, little is known about the dispersal of whole microorganisms in the marine environment, thus any or all of the six problems listed above could result. In addition, next to nothing is known about the functioning and efficiency of the three mechanisms for gene dispersal in the marine environment, so no one could predict whether the alien genes carried by the transgenic microorganism would disperse, the frequency of possible dispersal, the probability of dispersed genes being taken up by wild organisms, or the ultimate effects of dispersal. For these reason, the field testing of organisms in the marine environment should be deferred until research in biological oceanography, microbial ecology and environmental toxicology have clarified details of the mechanisms of dispersal of organisms and genes in the marine environment and a satisfactory risk
assessment methodology for field testing in the oceans has been developed. Without doubt, for the present it is more difficult to evaluate and determine the possible effects of the field testing in the marine environment of transgenic marine animals, plants and microorganisms than in the terrestrial environment.
To conclude this chapter, the expectations and problems of marine species field testing today are approximately the same as it was for terrestrial and/or atmospheric field testing when these activities were commencing some ten years ago. Unlike former times, however, we are at this time able to access the experience of past field tests and draw lessons for future marine field testing. Today's scientists are thus better prepared to prepare comprehensive environmental impact statements prior to testing based on risk assessment methodologies adapted for the marine environment, design safe test protocols, and to institute efficient mechanisms for monitoring test events and the long-term effects of tests. Lessons from the past also strongly indicate that it is in the vital interest of each country to have an effective, comprehensive regulatory regime in place that will ensure proper precautions are taken, while preventing poorly planned and executed field tests from being
undertaken.
<section>Chapter 3</section>
<section>Marine biotechnology its sub-areas</section>
Although much R&D related to the marine environment has been, and is being, done throughout the world, it is only recently that a subset of these activities has been termed marine biotechnology.
<section>Definition of marine biotechnology</section>
In a strict sense, "...any scientific investigation that focusses on marine organisms and that utilizes new cell, protein and nucleic acid technologies such as recombinant DNA, hybridoma/monoclonal production, protein engineering, polymerase chain reaction, and DNA hybridization" can be called marine biotechnology. However, this definition is believed too narrow by many researchers who hold that a host of different R&D activities rightfully are sub-areas of marine biotechnology. Taking into account this lack of consensus on what marine biotechnology constitutes and encompasses, we do not draw rigid disciplinary lines in this report but instead view marine biotechnology as a field that encompasses a patchwork of scientific and technological activities relating directly to marine organisms or their parts and that employ biotechnology techniques. Thus, a broad definition is analogous to the definition of biotechnology given in Chapter 2 (Bull, Holt and Lilly 1982). Marine
biotechnology then can be defined as "the application of scientific and engineering principles to the processing of materials by marine biological agents to provide goods and services" (for other definitions, see Appendix C).
When biotechnology techniques are used for research in certain applied fields, such as aquaculture, fisheries and natural marine products, they are included under the rubric of marine biotechnology. This point is important because, as will be discussed below, it is often efficacious and desirable to merge traditional activities with new developments in biotechnology.
<section>Marine biotechnology research and applications</section>
Although thousands of projects have been or are being undertaken that can be considered as marine biotechnology R&D, it is possible and convenient to divide them into nine subareas: aquaculture, marine animal health, marine natural products, biofilm and bioadhesion, bioremediation, cell culture, biosensors, biological oceanography including public health, and terrestrial agriculture.
Aquaculture
Aquaculture is a general term that refers to the husbandry of aquatic (brackish-, freshand saltwater) animals and plants at densities that are greater than those found under natural conditions MAO 1991). The development of the world's aquaculture sector has been impressive, having increased production from approximately 10 million tons in 1985 to 14 million tons today, and estimated at 22 million tons by 2000. If these projections hold true, FAO estimates that by the end of the century aquaculture products will account for 20 to 25 percent of the world fisheries production by weight, and in excess of 50 percent by value (FAO 1989). In comparison, the yield from world fisheries was approximately 99.5 million tons in 1989 according to FAO (1989 FAO statistics 1992), which is very near to its estimated maximum sustainable yield of about 100 million tons per year.
Aquaculture has been practiced in some societies for millennia, usually in ponds holding low-density populations of finfish, shellfish or crustaceans (Costa-Pierce 1987). More recent is the development of the socalled "intensive" aquaculture which may be defined as a condition when the density of fish exceeds 1 kilogram of fish per 57 cubic decimeters of water or 1400 kilograms of shrimp per 0.4 hectares of water (McCoy 1990). For example, in culturing prawns in the Philippines, the stocking rate for the giant tiger prawn, Penaeus monodon, in ponds where traditional techniques are used is about 10,000 prawns per hectare; in an intensive system the stocking rate is 100,000300,000 prawns per hectare (Primavera 1991). The primary products of aquaculture are food for human consumption or natural products useful as biomedical reagents, medicines, food additives, and jewelry. The culture of ornamental fish is a relatively new but rapidly growing area of aquaculture.
Mariculture is that subset of aquaculture that is practiced in salt water. The term mariculture is specific and will not be used in this report unless there is a need to exclude from the matter under consideration all but marine organisms.
The practice of aquaculture consists of the application of a set of low-technology endeavors pertaining to the breeding, propagation, harvesting and marketing of algae, fish, crustaceans, bivalves and gastropods. The major problems encountered by aquaculturists relate to the siting of the culture ponds (Bailey 1988; Fernandez-Pato 1989; Primavera 1991). In particular, the prospective aquaculturist needs to know the composition and chemical characteristics of the soil in which ponds will be constructed, the quantity and quality of the water in which animals will grow, and the ready availability of animal feed. Further, incorrectly sited ponds may severely damage the nearby environment. For instance, pond construction has often entailed the destruction of mangroves; sweet water used in hatcheries may deplete underground aquifers of fresh water; and untreated effluents and wastes from farms and hatcheries may pollute streams and lakes in which they are released. Once operations
are under way, culture systems may become populated with contaminants that compete with crop plants for food and sunlight (Gellenbeck and Chapman 1983). Further, wastes from seafood processing plants associated with aquaculture can create disposal problems; wastes usually are 20-25 percent for finfish and 80-85 percent for shellfish (Technical Q&A 1991b). These problems do not relate directly to marine biotechnology and will not be discussed further. However, conditions created by intensive aquaculture do create problems that may be solved or alleviated via the application of biotechnology techniques. Thus, what will be discussed here is the deployment of marine biotechnology to increase yields from aquaculture or to enhance the quality of its products. In particular, biotechnology offers new methods to improve the heath status of cultured organisms (see next section) and to regulate grown and reproduction of commercially important finfish, crustaceans, bivalves and algae. A
discussion of specific marine biotechnology applications to these organisms follow.
GROWTH AND REGULATION OF FINFISH. One of the early successes of advanced biotechnology was the manufacture of human growth hormone SIGH) by genetically engineered E. coli. Before this accomplishment, the only source of hGH was pituitary glands recovered from human cadavers. Not only was the extraction of the hGH from the gland difficult, but also approximately 5000 of the minute glands were required in order to produce one gram of the substance. After techniques were perfected for the large-scale manufacture of hGH produced by genetically engineered bacteria, or recombinant hGH for short, sufficient quantities have become available to treat all who need it and to fully supply medical researchers.
The developmental process that resulted in recombinant hGH has been duplicated in regard to animal growth hormones. Thus, beginning in the early 1970s, extraction techniques were developed to recover various growth hormones from their respective animal pituitary glands, including several fish species. Since each of these procedures was laborious and costly, very little of these "natural" growth hormones were available to researchers. After techniques were developed to construct genetically engineered bacteria that produce growth hormone, the Maryland Biotechnology Institute's Center of Marine Biotechnology genetically engineered E. cold to produce rainbow trout growth hormone tGH). In subsequent experiments, the genetically engineered tGH was injected into yearling trout. The growth rates and increase in weight and length of the treated trout was markedly higher than of the untreated fish (Agellon and others 1988). Other experiments involving the injection of recombinant
salmon GH into rainbow trout and recombinant tuna GH into the Japanese snapper produced similar results (Heyward and Hammond 1990). Although the results from these experiments would seem to hold promise for commercial opportunities, technical problems associated with injecting large numbers of fish with GH are so severe as to negate this approach in aquaculture. Alternative methods had to be developed to raise the GH level in fish.
One way was to insert the genes coding for GH production directly into the genome of the targeted organism. When this was done, it led to a spectacular manifestation of applied molecular genetics - the development of transgenic animals. These are animals into whose genome a gene or genes from another organism has artificially been introduced. Animals that have been successfully transformed by the time of this writing include the fruit fly, sea urchin, fish, frog, mouse, pig and cow. In the animals where gene transfer techniques have been particularly successful, including several species of fish, the foreign gene was transmitted to subsequent generations of progeny.
Much effort in industrialized countries is being devoted to producing transgenic fish. Fish are good candidates for study for several reasons: the large, transparent and externally fertilized eggs of fish species make them ideal subjects for genetic manipulation; the embryonic development may be relatively easily observed and studied in fish eggs; and fish that have been genetically altered may be more valuable commercially than their untreated relatives (Liu and others 1990).
There are three stages to developing a transgenic fish. First, the foreign gene has to be integrated into the genome of the target organism. The present method of choice for delivering the foreign gene is by microinjection (Chen and Powers 1990). In brief, the foreign gene that is to be inserted into the new host is cloned to produce a large number of that gene. Then, a gene construct is developed by attaching a promoter to the gene, and hundreds of the gene construct are injected into the nuclei of the target organism's embryo by glass micro-pipette. The treated embryo is reimplanted into the female fish. After the embryo is full-grown, DNA is extracted from it and analyzed. Individual transgenic fish are identified and propagated for further study. According to a recent review, nineteen experiments have so far been carried out to develop transgenic fish (Chen and Powers 1990).
Second, the gene must express itself through the production of GH. Proof of expression comes from the analysis of the GH found in the fish and by comparing the size and weight of transformed fish with untreated control groups. Referring to the nineteen experiments mentioned above, ten different fish (common carp, Chinese carp, catfish, goldfish, loach, medaka, salmon, Tilapia, rainbow trout and zebrafish) have been successfully transformed (Chen and Powers 1990).
Third, the new trait has to be transmitted to subsequent generations of progeny. The trait in progeny is detected in the same manner as in the foregoing step. Considering the ten fish wherein expression was achieved, in only two cases was the trait successfully transmitted to progeny (Chen and Powers 1990).
The progeny from one of the two successful experiments are now being field tested. Researchers at Auburn University in Alabama (USA) are growing transgenic carp to replicate under farm conditions the 40 percent increase in growth observed in the laboratory. (The details of this test and the safety of field testing are discussed in Chapter 4.)
Research on transferring genes other than those that code for GHis also under way. For example, certain fish that live in extremely cold waters (between 0° and -2° C) have evolved so they produce antifreeze proteins, which prevent their blood from freezing. However, most foodfish, such as salmon, salmonids and trout, do not have this protein. The susceptibility of salmon to death by freezing has, for instance, prevented salmon aquaculture in Atlantic Canada (Cutler, Saleem and Georges 1989). Inserting the gene coding for the anti-freeze protein could thus help in extending the living range of important food-fish into waters colder than those they now inhabit. Scientists at the Johns Hopkins University in Maryland and the University of Illinois have identified and cloned the genes that code for the anti-freeze proteins in the winter flounder (Gourlie and others 1984). Attempts have been made to transfer these genes to the Atlantic salmon. Although the genes were expressed,
the level of proteins was too low to afford protection against freezing (Chen and Powers 1990). Work to improve expression of the genes is proceeding rapidly, however. Antifreeze proteins are also being studied in China, where researchers at the Institute of Genetics, Beijing, are investigating the fish Pseudopleuronectes yokohamae, which inhabits the Yellow Sea. After having isolated and characterized the gene coding for this protein, these scientists were able to synthesize this gene and insert it in the bacteria E. coli, which manufactures large quantities of the protein (Yaoqing and Xiongfeng 1990).
In addition to the safety concerns that surround the development of transgenic fish (and other transgenic organisms), difficult scientific and technical problems will have to be overcome before this sub-area of marine biotechnology will progress significantly (Kapuscinski 1990). Specifically, techniques for gene transfer have to be improved; better promoters that mediate the foreign gene will have to be found and tested; and physical, chemical and environmental factors that maximize the effectiveness of the transgenic fish will have to be determined (Chen and Powers 1990).
GROWTH AND REGULATION OF BIVALVES, GASTROPODS AND CRUSTACEANS. The major groups of bivalves are clams, oysters, mussels and cockles; gastropods include abalone; while crustaceans include shrimp, crabs and lobsters. Oysters are considered a delicacy by many, and much research is directed at improving yields from oyster farming to satisfy a growing demand. Fortunately, the culture process provides a good opportunity to manipulate the animal's genome for increased disease resistance, faster growth, or triploidy.
The process of culturing oysters begins with the induced spawning of sexually mature females and males, whose egg and sperm unite to form embryos. Embryos develop in a short time in larvae, which grow until they reach a stage of maturity when they metamorphose into juvenile oysters (spat). Spat usually set on cultch, where they harden until final maturation, which is called "grow-out." Hardening and grow-out can be induced to take place on the seabed or in floating rafts. Spats grow to market size in two to three years.
There are several biotechnology techniques that can be applied to improve the aquaculture of oysters. The application of one set of techniques, triploidy, deserves description because it has had a remarkable economic impact.
Triploid oysters, which contain three sets of chromosomes instead of the normal two, were first developed by researchers at the University of Maine in 1979. This accomplishment, which was based on earlier work done by scientists in Norway on fish, resulted from treating oyster eggs with the chemical cytochalasin B. which inhibits normal cell division, creating two sets of chromosomes in the egg. Triploidy results from the union of this egg with a normal sperm containing one chromosome set (Allen 1988).
After oysters was deemed safe for human consumption by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the technique was quickly applied by aquaculturists in the state of Washington. The reason for their positive reception was that the farmed oyster in the U.S. northwest, Crassostrea gigas, spawns during the summer and becomes less flavorful because reproductive tissue forms throughout the body. Triploid oysters, being sterile, do not undergo seasonal change and thus maintain constant texture and flavor throughout the year. In addition, triploids are valuable to aquefarmers because they grow faster and to a larger size than do diploids. Triploids have become a marketing success story; they represented about 50 percent of the U.S. northwest's total production in 1988 (Allen 1988).
Understandably, the loss of oysters to disease is a serious problem to aquaculturists. Oyster production in the Chesapeake Bay, for example, has declined precipitously during the last few years, due primarily to a combination of pollution and disease. To meet this threat, an R&D project was begun in October 1987 at the University of Maryland to develop and propagate cultch-less oysters (that is, oysters that do not attach themselves to a solid surface). The cultch-less oyster has two advantages over its wild relative. First, because it grows much faster, it can be brought to the market faster, and the disease problem is nearly eliminated since the oyster is harvested before the full effects of disease become manifest. Second, the culinary quality of the cultch-less oyster is high, making it a favorite for oyster lovers. In view of the cultch-less oyster species' qualities, an industrial firm specializing in mariculture has entered into a contract with the university to
market the oysters.
Bivalves are usually not cultch-less, but instead their larvae settle on hard surfaces where they attain their adult form and remain the rest of their lives. The settling phenomena has been intensively studied by several groups, but most scientists refer to the pioneering research done in this subject by Dr. Daniel Morse's group at the University of California at Santa Barbara (Morse and Morse 1988). In a series of elegant experiments involving abalone, this group showed that spawning (the release of fertilized eggs into the seawater) in this animal was induced and regulated by prostaglandins (a group of hormones that regulate reproduction in animals). The synthesis of abalone prostaglandins is controlled by the rather common inorganic chemical hydrogen peroxide. The spawning of abalone is thus easily triggered by adding small amounts of hydrogen peroxide to the seawater surrounding the site where researchers wish the event to take place.
After spawning, the development, settling and metamorphosis of the larvae depend on the recognition by the larvae of specific molecular signals. Unless this signal is received, the larvae will remain free swimming, to die within a month. However, if larvae swim in the proximity of certain red algae that encrust rocks, they will settle on the algae or nearby surface. The chemical that induces settling was found to be a peptide (a short chain of amino acids), similar to a neurotransmitter chemical found in animals called GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid). Addition of the inexpensive GABA to seawater will induce larvae to settle specified surfaces.
Morse's work has led to other investigators researching similar phenomena among giant clams, mussels, oysters, scallops and other bivalves. The aggregate of research has led to an explosion in the knowledge about the molecular mechanisms of sensory receptors, gene expression and cellular response to chemical stimuli, and signal transmission in neural networks (Morse and Morse 1988). Findings are also being applied by industry. For example, abalone has been in great demand in California as a culinary delicacy, driving up prices and stimulating overfishing of the gastropod. At the same time, the protected marine otters have grown in number from a few dozen to over 5000. Unfortunately, otters' preferred food is abalone, so where otters live and propagate, abalone soon disappear; and California abalone has become a rare treat purchased at a very high price. To meet the market demand, three companies have in the past five years or so begun to culture abalones, using hydrogen
peroxide to bring on spawning and GABA to induce setling (Morse 1991). Other bivalve programs utilizing similar techniques have been established in California; abalone and bivalve aquaculture capitalizing on this research is also well under way in China and Taiwan.
Also of commercial importance is research being undertaken at the University of Maryland to define a "gene bank" for the commercially important oyster Crassostrea virginica (Colwell 1986). This accomplishment sets the stage for the manipulation of this species' genome. Oysters are fine experimental subjects since they produce a very large number of larvae and intermediate stages, allowing scientists to easily and quickly observe the effects of their trials.
Biotechnology-related research on crustacean species lags behind that being done on finfish and bivalves. The most immediate applications of marine biotechnology to crustacean aquaculture relates to enhancing animal health.
GROWTH AND REGULATION OF ALGAE.
Algae are nonvascular, photosynthetic plants that contain chlorophyll (Robinson 1985). They may range in size and complexity from the microscopic, single-cell to the 70-meter giant kelp Macrocystis. It is important to note that marine plants, like their terrestrial counterparts, are primary products of nature - consuming CO2 absorbed in seawater, using sunlight as their sole source of energy, and requiring little additional input in terms of trace nutrients. Thus the production of plant biomass or natural substances by plants require lower levels of support energy than do similar production by bacteria, yeast or animals, which are secondary products of nature, feeding on plants, animals or fossil fuels.
Algae are generally classified according to two groups; macro- and micro-algae. There are over 21,000 macroalgal species in the world, but the most numerous are Rhodo phyceae, or red algae (accounting for more than 60 percent of these species); Phaeophyceae, or brown algae (25 percent); and Chlorophyceae, or green algae (about 15 percent). Red and brown algae are commercially important to the colloidusing industry (Renn 1986b); red and green algae are important food in Asia. Algae may be collected from wild stocks, primarily giant kelp, or grown in aquaculture. The total world production of macroalgae per year is approximately 4 million tons worth about $1 billion. The largest producers are China, Japan and the Republic of Korea (Ruying and Qinguin 1992), but significant quantities of wild seaweed are harvested in California, the eastern United States and Canada, Chile,
France, the United Kingdom, Indonesia and the Philippines.
Of more pertinence to this report, algal aquaculture has been practiced in Asia for a long time and has much importance for producing food, fertilizer and industrial chemicals. Two algal aquaculture techniques predominate. The first is outplanting, which is the culturing of algae in the ocean waters of the coastal zone. One outplanting technique consists of suspending ropes impregnated with spores from rafts. The spores develop into plants, which are allowed to develop naturally. Ropes may be raised or lowered to expose algae to optimum light, accelerating normal growth by several months. In another technique, cuttings of the alga are tied to a monoline stretched along the seabed. Harvesting takes place after two or four months, after the plant has attained a weight of more than 1 kilogram (Llana 1991). Outplanting is practiced extensively in China, Japan and the Philippines to cultivate various types of red alga.
The second aquaculture technique is growing algae in a closed system. ln this method, large ponds are dug into muddy ground and the ponds formed are subdivided into compartments of about 0.2 hectares. Each compartment has an entrance and exit gate to facilitate flooding. Seawater is let in and cover the ponds to a depth of about .8 meters. Algal cuttings are stuck in the mud and allowed to grow for about two months or until the bottom is uniformly covered (Llana 1991). This method demands a constant supply of fresh, unpolluted seawater and requires the addition of nitrogenous fertilizer. The technique allows the farmer to control that part of the growth cycle when algae are growing the fastest and it eliminates losses from inclement weather. Closed systems are used by Europeans, Filipinos and Taiwanese to cultivate species of red algae.
Algae have several uses. Bulk macroalgae is used by Asian farmers as fertilizer and to fuel digesters, which produce hydrogen for local use as energy (Gold and Shultz 1986). Green and red algae are used for food in Asia; for example, algae of the genus Porphyra is used to produce the food nori. Nori is an important food staple; in 1986 9 x 109 sheets worth $450 million were produced for the Japanese market alone (Japan 1991). However, the major industrial importance of algae is that they contain a group of chemicals called hydrocolloids, which includes agars, algins and carrageenans. In 1989 the worldwide demand for alginates (from mainly brown algae) was satisfied with the production of 35,000 tons; most of it was used by the textile industry (50 percent), food industry (30 percent), paper industry (6 percent) and pharmaceutical industry (5 percent). The production of carrageenans (from red algae) was 17,000 tons, while the world's demand for the substance stood at 20,000
tons (Richards-Rajadura 1990). Carrageenans are used by the food industry (78 percent) and cosmetic industry (22 percent). The production of agars (from red algae) was 6,700 tons; this quantity is insufficient to meet world demand, which grows 25 percent each year (Polysaccharides 1991). Agars are used by food industry (58 percent), scientific laboratories (28 percent) and pharmaceutical industry (14 percent) (Mabeau, Valiat and Brault 1990). Agars are particularly important to the conduct of biotechnology research and to bioindustry processes.
The processing of algae by industry to extract and purify hydrocolloids consists of washing the algae; dissolving the raw hydrocolloids with alkali; clarifying and precipitating the hydrocolloids; removing unwanted color; purifying the compound by ion exchange; drying and milling the hydrocolloid (Mabeau, Valiat and Brault 1990). Algae processing is a low to medium technology endeavor to which biotechnology would seem to have little application. However, biotechnology techniques may be applied to develop algal strains possess more favorable characteristics than do wild strains. For example, researchers at Northeastern University in Boston (USA), are developing hybrid strains of agar-producing macroalgae that can be cultivated more efficiently than the wild strains and that produce more agar per unit weight. The widespread introduction of genetically improved strains may lead to a decrease of the cost of agar, which now is $24-$200 per kilogram, and agarose, which costs
$250$40,000 per kilogram (Renn 1991). Other strains could be developed that contain increased amounts of specialty chemicals and pharmaceuticals. It is interesting to note that while 80 percent of the macroalgae destined for commerce originate in the developing countries of the Asia-Pacific region, 90 percent of the colloid industry is located in West Europe, Japan and Korea (Ruying and Qinguin 1992).
An illustrative example of what is being done in algal biotechnology is the work on macroscopic alga at the University of North Carolina Center for Marine Science Research. Researchers are using cell culture techniques to enhance the growth characteristics or red alga for the purpose of increasing this species' ability to produce agar. An interesting aside is that parallel work, using the same techniques, is proceeding on angiosperm (a plant, such as eelgrass, that grows well in shallow waters). The objective of this work is to enhance the plant's ability to grow close to shore so it will be able to hold sand dunes in place and to stabilize mud flats (CMSR 1990).
Microalgal R&D has been focussed mostly on four species; Chlorella. Dunaliella, Scenedesmus and Spirulina. The approach used is similar to that in industrial microbiology, namely mutagenesis and selection of mutants with desired traits. The aim of Chlorella and Spirulina R&D has been to develop these organisms for low-cost, highprotein food production, but this goal has remained exclusive since low-cost protein from terrestrial crops is abundantly available. To illustrate, the cost of efficiently producing one kilogram of Chlorella is about $10, while Spirulina costs $2-$10 per kilogram. In comparison, the high proteincontaining soybean costs only about $0.2 per kilogram (Chapman and Gellenbeck 1989). Reflecting its high price, in the food industry microalgae has a limited market as health foods, but little else. Even if the production costs of microalgae is dramatically lowered, regulators will have to determine whether dried microalgae is safe when consumed in large
quantities. Appropriate testing will have to be done to settle this question.
Beyond food, microalgae can be used to manufacture substances of interest and value to industry. For example, food industry and mariculture needs large quantities of pigments, such as beta carotene, phycoerythrin and zeaxanthin. One successful production system has been developed by Microbio Resources, San Francisco (USA), consisting of large open outdoor tanks or ponds populated by Dunaliella, which synthesize large quantities of the Vitamin A precursor beta carotene. Similarly, the Israeli firm Koor Foods is developingDunaliella bardawilli, a species of microalgae found in the Sinai peninsula, for glycerol and beta carotene production. Another Israeli group at the Ben Gurion University is investigating the possibility of using Porphyridiun to produce on a large-scale a carrageenan-like polysaccharide in large outdoor salt water ponds (Weiner 1985).
Although the classical techniques of mutation, selection and breeding are most common to microalgae R&D, advanced biotechnology techniques are being used to develop strains that will grow faster, be more resistant to disease, and better adapted for mass propagation (Tucker 1985). Similar to the approaches researchers use when working on terrestrial bacteria, fungi and higher plants, certain problems have to be overcome in microalgae biotechnology. First, the foreign gene has to be successfully introduced into the microalgae. A major problem here is to find ways to penetrate the tough microalgal cell wall. Second, the entry of the gene into the new host has to be monitored as does its ability to express the desired product. Third, the stability of the introduced gene has to be ascertained; that is, the introduced material must be incorporated in the host's genome where it must continue to function as expected. In addition, when the microalgal cell divides, the gene must be
replicated and passed on in subsequent generations of progeny. Although encouraging progress is being reported, scientists have not solved these three problems (Brown, Dunahay and Jarvis 1989).
Nevertheless, respectable progress is being achieved in microalgae biotechnology. For example, a team at the Solar Energy Research Institute in Colorado (USA) is applying rDNA to isolate genes that regulate lipid biosynthesis and to introduce these genes into microalgae that have potential for outdoor mass culture (Brown, Dunahay and Jarvis 1989), while the Australian company Wesfarmers Algal Biotechnology's success in developing microalgae for the production of beta carotene and animal feed. Other microalgae production systems are being developed to produce amino acids, animal feeds, fatty acids, feed pigments, hydrocarbon fuels, pharmaceuticals and polysaccharides (Benemann 1989).
To sum up, whether macroalgae or micro algae, the advanced techniques of biotechnology could be employed to improve the algae itself, making it more useful to industry. Theoretically, these improvements may develop varieties that:
o grow faster
o yield higher concentrations of desired products
o contain fewer impurities that complicate processing
o produce new or unique products
o are more disease resistant than present species
o will grow in colder, warmer, shallower or deeper water than is now possible
o possess better nutritional characteristics than present species
o produce more biomass per cubic unit (Renn 1986a).
Marine animal health
Bacterial, Algal, protozoan and viral infectious diseases are widespread among natural fish populations. But animals raised in intensive aquaculture are especially vulnerable to damage by disease. The most common bacterial disease agents found in fresh water aquaculture are Aeromonas and Pseudomonas; while in mariculture the major pathogen is Vibrio. Polluted waters favor the development of Algal, diseases; the most common agent is Saprolegnia (Sheriff and Subasinghe 1990). Two types of viral diseases are particularly deadly to aquacultured salmon - infectious pancreatic necrosis and infectious hematopoietic necrosis (IHN). Similar diseases afflict catfish, flounder, menhaden and striped bass (Klausner 1985). Protozoans, mainly ciliates and flagellates, damage fish by feeding on and within their skin and gills (Noga 1987). The Epizootic Ulcerative Syndrome is a widespread disease afflicting fresh and brackish water fish; the causative organism is unknown. Bacterial, Algal,
and viral diseases also afflict bivalves and crustaceans.
In general, waterborne bacterial and viral pathogens are attenuated in well-managed aquaculture ponds and basin, probably due to the pH of the water and predation by protozoans and zooplankton (Edwards 1991). However, when fish do become afflicted by bacterial diseases, aquaculturists will as a matter of course disperse antibiotics, antibacterials and disinfectants in the waters of ponds and tanks holding the diseased fish. The quantities of antibiotics used in aquaculture is large, for example, in Norway, which is the world's largest producer of aquacultured salmon, aquaculturists used 17,000 kilograms of antibiotics in 1985, but increased this amount to 48,000 kilograms in 1987 (Technical Q&A 1991a). Antibiotics commonly used in aquaculture include aminoglycosides, beta lactams, tetracyclines, macrolides and chloramphenicol. Most of them are also used to treat infectious diseases of humans. The employment of antibiotics in aquaculture poses potentially serious public
health and environmental problems since genes coding for antibiotic resistance may disperse via conjugation from wild bacteria affected by aquaculture operations to human pathogens, such as the bacterial species causing typhoid fever, cholera and dysentery. Further, if improperly used, residues of antibiotics may taint the flesh of harvested fish. Proper management practices can lessen risks associated with antibiotic usage in aquaculture, but cannot eliminate it altogether (Technical Q&A 1991a).
There are no approved drugs for treating fish viral diseases (although aquaculturists have over time empirically developed a variety of methods for containing diseases afflicting their stocks). Since fish that survive a viral disease outbreak may become carriers of the causative virus, once certain diseases infect a pond, the only recourse may be to destroy the animals it contains and to empty and decontaminate the pond itself. These drastic steps obviously are costly and may bankrupt the aquaculturist. To illustrate, shrimp production in Taiwan dropped from 114,000 metric tons in 1987 to about 50,000 metric tons in 1988 and 30,000 tons in 1991 Record year 1992), largely due to the ravages of a disease that decimated black tiger shrimp. The ability to prevent by vaccination diseases that afflict animals being cultured would undoubtedly be of immense value to aquaculturists. Only two efficacious vaccines are, however, available for fish and one for lobster; none is available
to prevent diseases afflicting shrimp and shellfish.
Whether a scientist is attempting to develop a vaccine for use in terrestrial animals or marine animals, R&D methods will be similar. In general, there are three types of vaccines; attenuated, killed and biosynthetic vaccines. Attenuated vaccines consist of pathogenic organisms that have been treated so they are no longer infective, but are still able to elicit an antibody reaction in the vaccinated host. The attenuated vaccine is somewhat more risky than the others because the attenuated organism may under certain circumstances revert back to the infectious form capable of causing disease. The second type of vaccine consists of the killed pathogenic organism. Although safe, this vaccine type may elicit a weaker antibody response in the host than do the others. The third vaccine type is one developed via genetic engineering. Briefly, a protein constituting the pathogenic bacteria's cell wall or the virus' surface that is capable of eliciting an antibody response in the host
is identified. The gene coding for that protein is constructed, then inserted in an industrial bacterium, which produces large quantities of the protein. The protein then becomes the basis of an effective, safe vaccine.
Those who seek to develop fish vaccines are faced with two problems that their counterparts working on terrestrial animal vaccines do not have to contend with. First, the causative organisms of most of the diseases affecting marine animals are unknown, therefore much basic research is required to identify and characterize infectious agents afflicting marine animals and to clarify the intricate relationships between hosts and parasites. Second, fish being what they are, are difficult to vaccinate. There are two methods now in use. First, fish may be immersed in waters containing a high concentration of the vaccine. Second fish can be vaccinated by injection. Each method presents difficulties, principally with the dilution of the vaccine past usefulness and the stability of the preparation under harsh physical conditions. The immersion method is cost-effective, but some vaccines will not work when administered this way. Vaccinating fish individually is a manpower-intensive
exercise; its costs cannot be justified unless the fish to be vaccinated are relatively valuable (for example, food-fish that are near to market size and fish valued by collectors). It bears mentioning that a new method for administering vaccines (and therapeutics) to fish is being tested. It utilizes a combination of immersion and ultrasound. Fish immersed in tanks that are exposed to ultrasound for 10-15 minutes record a 10-20 fold increase over controls in internal levels of the administered drug (Gain 1991).
Of the ongoing work to develop fish vaccines, that being done on a vaccine against IHN may be furthest along. The importance of this viral disease was recognized in 1953 when it caused a massive die-off of salmon in the state of Washington. The disease has since that time spread as far as Japan, causing damaging epidemics in many salmon and trout hatcheries. Wild fish are not spared; an estimated 20 percent of salmon fry in British Columbia die from this disease (Powers 1990). In view of the damage this disease causes, it is understandable that much effort is being put into investigating the IHN virus and developing a vaccine against it. In fact, prototypes of the three types of vaccines have been developed and tested in the laboratory (Powers 1990). All protected fish against IHN virus when injected. However, the first (a conventional type killed vaccine) proved not useful when administered in water. The second, the attenuated type, was effective via water borne
inoculation, but questions regarding its safety have not been resolved. The third type, which is a recombinant killed type vaccine, shows most promise in terms of efficacy, safety and price. This is being developed by scientists at the Oregon State University, who have identified, characterized and cloned several genes coding for proteins that elicit antibody formation in fish. High levels of the protein they code for have been expressed (Engleking and Leong 1991). The next step is to scale up the manufacture of candidate vaccine and to gain approval from the USDA to test it in the field.
Substances other than vaccines may have protective functions. For example, an extract from the shellfish Ecteinascidia turbinada protects eel from Aeromonas infection and in general enhances the immunological defenses of blue crab, crayfish and prawn (Colwell 1986). The Phillips Petroleum Company Norway sells a glucan, produced by yeast, with the trade name Macrogard, which it claims improves the efficiency of vaccines and helps farmed fish resist disease (Hoffman 1990). Undoubtedly a host of as yet undiscovered biological substances from marine organisms have antibiotic, protective and curative powers that will benefit aquaculture.
Some R&D is directed at detecting fish diseases. Diagnostic methods based on monoclonal antibody technology (see below) are being developed at the University of Maine for infectious pancreatic necrosis and IHN (Klausner 1985). Diagnosing these diseases at an early stage may help in limiting loss of fish stock, as carriers of the viruses causing the diseases can be identified and eliminated, limiting the spread of diseases. In addition, better diagnostics will be useful in vaccine R&D.
Marine natural products
Natural resource chemists have for over 100 years been screening the world's organisms for useful chemical substances. The results of this effort is impressive; about 20,000 chemicals from natural products have been characterized and the annual sales of pharmaceuticals derived from plants reaches $10 billion per year in the United States alone. Yet little or nothing is known about the chemical composition of most existing terrestrial plants and microorganisms; those inhabiting the marine environment are even more alien. It is no surprise, therefore, that large numbers of new natural substances are discovered every year.
By and large, chemicals constituting organisms fall within one of two groups. First, there are primary and intermediate metabolites and cofactors, which are essential for the growth of the organism and its reproductive metabolism. Second, there are secondary metabolites - substances that have no essential function and whose reason for existence are not so clear. They -are thought to have arisen in the course of evolution in order to confer on the organism a particular advantage, which is now unclear (dining 1991). Secondary metabolites have diverse chemical structures, but smaller groups of organisms, such as genus, species, or even strain, often produce substances distinct to that group. Since secondary metabolites are by far the most important group of useful chemicals produced by marine organisms, and since their evaluation is in fact the objective of marine natural product research, discussion here is limited to these chemicals.
Secondary metabolites, whether of marine or terrestrial origin, do not have a single function but instead exhibit a wide range of activities. Five types of activities are important for our consideration: antibiotic; antiinflammatory, anti-tumor and anti-viral; marine toxins; enzymes; and secondary metabolites as insecticides and herbicides.
ANTIBIOTIC. Microorganisms, whether in marine or terrestrial environs, face intense competition from other organisms. Some are able to gain an advantage by producing antibiotics that kill or inactivate competitors. Certain soil bacteria, particularly actinomy cetes, are especially prolific producers of antibiotics. In fact, 74 percent of the antibiotics produced by the pharmaceutical industry come from actinomycetes. However, numerous other bacteria and fungi produce thousands of different antibiotics. By far most antibiotics, however, have limited or no utility to humans because they are too toxic, unstable, or possess other undesirable characteristics.
A relatively large number of marine organisms are known to produce secondary metabolites that possess antibiotic properties, including blue-green, green, brown and red algae, dinoflagellates, sponges, jellyfish, sea anemones and others (Baslow 1977). So far little research has been done on groups of organisms and the specific antibiotics they produce. One exception to this rule came about as a result of an investigation of the predatorprey interactions between a nudibranch and sponge. The nudibranch, which is soft-shelled and slow moving, appears vulnerable to predators. Yet, it is but rarely attacked. Upon investigation it was found that the animal secretes an antibiotic substance, which scientists eventually isolated and identified, then named mimosamycin (Scheuer 1990). Mimosamycin belongs to a chemical group named isoquinolinequinones, which had first been found a terrestrial Streptomyces species. Further research is required in order to clarify if mimosamycin is in fact
secreted by the nudibranch itself or by a commensal Streptomyces species colonizing the nudibranch.
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY, ANTI-TUMOR AND ANTIWRAL. As mentioned, most antibiotics cannot be used in animals, including humans, because they are too toxic. The toxicity of these agents stem from their actions being nonselective in that they interfere with universal metabolic reactions in the recipient (dining 1991). Some of these toxic agents affect primarily rapidly dividing and growing cells. By adjusting dosage and directing the action of these agents, they can be useful in treating tumors. Two such agents are now in clinical trials at the NCI. The first is Bryostatin, which was isolated from the bryozoan Bugula neritina, which lives in a symbiotic relationship with a yellow sponge found only in the Gulf of California, Mexico. The second is Didemnin B. isolated from the Caribbean tunicate Tridedemaum solidum. Didemnin is active against leukemia and melanoma; in addition, it shows strong anti-viral and immunosuppressive activity. Didemnin is in clinical testing (Klausner 1986).
Another secondary metabolite having promising properties is manoalide, which is named after the Manoa Valley in Oahu, Hawaii. This compound was found by a University of California at Santa Barbara researcher who had been investigating marine sponges for more than thirteen years. Manoalide was isolated from the South Pacific sponge Luffariella variabilis, and belongs to a group of chemicals called terpenes, although its structure is highly unusual (Klausner 1986). Detailed pharmacological studies of manoalide has shown it to have powerful antiinflammatory and analgesic properties, as well as evidencing some anti-leukemic and antifungal properties (Austin 1989). In view of these findings, the pharmaceutical company Allergan Corporation entered into a joint venture with manolide's discoverer; the substance is currently in clinical trials for use against skin disorders, includingpsoriasis. Further investigation of the same sponge has led to the discovery of two other compounds,
which are named Luffariellin A and B. Initial testing indicates that these compounds also possess antiinflammatory properties.
In general, sponges have proven to be a good source of secondary metabolites. The hundreds of compounds have been isolated from sponges represent many classes of chemicals, including alkaloids, sterols, terpenoids and others; some possess unique structures (Crews 1991). What is not so clear is whether the sponge itself is the source of these compounds or different microorganisms that live in a commensal or symbiotic relationship with the sponge. Studies of sponges reveal that an extremely large number of anaerobic bacteria, cyanobacteria, dinoflagellates, heterotrophic bacteria, and micro algae, inhabit them. When tested, some of these microorganisms proved to possess bioactive properties. These findings clearly show that much research has to be done to clarify the complex interrelationships between macroorganisms, such as the sponge, and the microorganisms that colonize them.
Another problem with trying to determine the origin of a bioactive compound is that some marine organisms, which lack physical protection such as a shell, use chemicals to deter attackers. However, the defensive chemicals are not always produced by the organism wielding them but instead are derived from exogenous sources. For example, nudibranchs commonly feed on invertebrates. Some nudibranchs appear to sequester from their prey substances toxic to fish that are thereupon stored in its tissues (Klausner 1986). This protection may even be passed on. The nudibranch "Spanish dancer" deposits its eggs in the open, on rocks and corals. Because they contain the bioactive substances called ulapualides, the eggs are free from predation. Incidentally, ulapualides exhibit anti-leukemic and anti-fungal properties.
MARINE TOXINS. Some secondary metabolites do not display general cytotoxicity but have specific pharmacological activity that make them extremely toxic to animals. For example, saxitoxins derived from dinoflagellates are fifty times as potent as curare (Rodrigue and others 1990). Since food chains in the marine environment often begin with dinoflagellates, it is no surprise that much human suffering has been caused by marine toxins. In 1987, for instance, 26 people died and another 161 were affected in Champerico, Guatemala after they ate clams that had assimilated saxitoxins from dinoflagellates (Rodrigue and others 1990). Other epidemics of paralytic shell fish poisoning have occurred recently in Borneo, Indonesia, Japan, New Guinea, Palau and the Philippines.
Perhaps even more frequent than shell fish poisoning is ciguatera fish poisoning. The sequence of events that take place before man is poisoned by this toxin is unmatched in nature. The ciguatoxin is produced and retained by dinoflagellates, which eventually settle on a macroalgae. Herbivorous fish feed on the macroalgae, incidentally ingesting the settled dinoflagellates. Predator fish eat the herbivorous fish, and then in turn are caught and eaten by people. The toxin thus passes unchanged through four different hosts in order to harm the fifth (Scheuer 1990).
When appropriately dispensed many toxins are valuable medicines as analgesics and muscle relaxants; others have anti-tumor activity. Thus the marine sponge Haliclona produces halitoxin, which inhibits the growth of certain types of tumors. Toxins that cannot by used as medicines because of side-effects or other problems nevertheless have important uses as models for the design and synthesis of other drugs (Colwell 1986). Toxins are also exceedingly valuable to medical researchers who study nerves and nerve impulse transmission, the central nervous system, and smooth muscle action. For example, tetrodotoxin, which is produced in specialized glands of the puffer fish and by certain marine bacterial species, acts to paralyze the peripheral nerves. It is used in research to elucidate the nerve excitation mechanism. Lophotoxin, which comes from the gorgonia Lophogorgia, inhibits nerve-stimulated contraction of muscle (Colwell 1986). A bacterium living commensally in the digestive
gland of the shellfish Babylonia japonica produces neosurugatoxin and prosurugatoxin, which are powerful ganglionblocking agents (dining 1991). The toxins found in the predator cone snail of the Conus genus can easily kill humans. The toxins act on calcium channels and sodium channels, as well as being targeted to neuromuscular and vasopressin receptors (Olivera and others 1990).
Much remains to be found out about marine toxins before use can be made of them in medicine or industry. One can imagine, for example, that palytoxin, which is a nonprotein polypeptide having approximately the same degree of toxicity as ricin (a toxin found in the castor bean), may find similar uses as this toxin. Ricin, which is exceedingly cytotoxic, has been coupled with monoclonal antibodies programmed to attach themselves to the cells of certain cancer tumors. Once so attached, the ricin selectively kills that cell without harming normal tissue. Palytoxin, and other marine toxins, may work better than ricin on certain cancers or may have other advantages that cannot now be determined. As one scientist has noted, "Peptides [toxins] are primary translation products of genes, with potent biological activity, and these peptides can be manipulated by the techniques of modern molecular genetics. This dual quality confers on the [toxins] an important role in the expanding
bridge between chemistry and modern molecular genetics."(Olivera and others 1990)
Marine toxins may pose difficult challenges to science. For instance, natives of the Hawaiian island of Maui when fending off invaders used a deadly toxin to tip their spears. The source of the toxin was, and remains, tidal pools inhabited by marine animals called Palythoa, which includes corals, anemones and jellyfish. However, these organisms do not make the toxin; it is manufactured by a marine bacteria that lives in symbiosis with Palythoa. Intensive investigation is proceeding to clarify how these bacteria make the toxin, the toxin's chemical structure, and its deadly mode of action (Fox 1982).
ENZYMES. Enzymes are used as pharmaceuticals, food additives and fine chemicals.
But in nature, enzymes are chemicals vital to life, catalyzing metabolic reactions, breaking down waste products, and making possible the transmission of neural signals. Marine organisms are richly endowed with many enzymes; some are unique. An example of a unique enzyme having enormous industrial potential is one being developed by a researcher at the University of California at Santa Barbara. Dr. M. Polne-Fuller was performing basic research, investigating the relationship between brown alga and an amoeba of the Trichospaherium genus. In the course of this work, she noted that the amoeba had the ability to dissolve the alga. Since the alga contains many chlorinated and brominated compounds, she reasoned that through an evolutionary process, certain amoeba had gained the ability to digest these compounds. Plastics, which are high molecular weight polyethylenes and polyvinyls, are typically chlorinated and brominated. Dr. Polne-Fuller wondered whether the amoeba would
perchance attack plastics. When tests indicated that the amoeba would indeed degrade plastic, she initiated research to improve the amoeba's degrading ability. Using mutation by ultraviolet light and selection, PolneFuller eventually isolated a mutant amoeba strain that has a powerful plastic degrading ability. More testing indicated that the mutant amoeba would destroy plastic in the field as well as in the laboratory. At this point the university applied to patent the mutant amoeba and contacted industry about joint-venturing. Occidental Chemical Company has entered into such an agreement and is now funding research to clarify the metabolic pathways of the amoeba by using C14-labelled polymers; these polymers are not available so they have to be developed before research proceeds to the next stage (Polne-Fuller, Rogerson and Gibor 1991).
An exceedingly promising area of marine biotechnology is the study of extremophiles-- organisms that live under extreme conditions of high heat, tremendous pressure, no light and high salinity. A profusion of such organisms are found inhabiting the abyssal depths of the ocean proximate to thermal vents. For example, marine bacteria of the Archaebacteria genus, giant tube worms, and others live and propagate at a depth of 2,000 meters and more, and where the temperature is 95° C and higher. Much research is being performed to clarify how proteins, nucleic acids and enzymes are able to function at these temperatures, which kill most organisms. Practical applications from this research are already being realized. For example, CP Laboratories in England is marketing an enzyme called Vent DNA polymerase, which has been purified from Thermococcus litoralis, a type of archaebacterium. This enzyme is useful in certain laboratory reactions because it remains active for over two hours
at 100° C (Thermostable 1990). Soon it should be possible to utilize these findings in manufacturing processes catalyzed by enzymes. These processes, when utilizing conventional enzymes, tend to be inactivated by heat higher than about 40° C. Since enzymes from extremophiles will have greater stability and last longer at high temperatures than those now used by industry, their availability would open up new possibilities for efficient manufacturing (Tucker 1985).
SECONDARY METABOLITES AS INSECTICIDES AND HERBICIDES. Screening of terrestrial microorganisms and plants has led to the discovery of many secondary metabolites having insecticidal activity. Their actions vary widely; they may block cellular respiration, inhibit protein synthesis, interfere with the synthesis of chitin (which is a major constituent of insects' outer shells), or obstruct digestion. Undoubtedly a large variety of marine organisms produce secondary metabolites that have similar properties, but so far little has been done in this area. For example, fishermen have known for a long time that flies settling on the annelid Lumbrineris brevicirra used as bait would die. Acting on that observation, a crude compound containing the active ingredient was prepared from the annelid as early as 1934. Eventually chemists elucidated the toxin's structure and named it nereistoxin. A synthesized derivative called cartap hydrochloride is now marketed as an insecticide. It is
active against several insect pests, including the rice stem borer. Unlike most chemical insecticides it is not toxic to warm-blooded animals and insects do not readily develop resistance against it (Colwell 1986).
Screening of terrestrial organisms has also uncovered several that produce secondary metabolites affecting plants, including plant hormones, wilting agents, growth regulators and phytotoxins. Some secondary metabolites, such as homoalanosine produced by Streptomyces galilaeus, have both insecticidal and herbicidal properties (dining 1991). As with the case of insecticides, we can also expect to find marine organisms that produce metabolites which act on plants in differing ways, including herbicidal effects. But so far this area is mostly unknown.
As an aside, certain properties of chitin and chitosan have pertinence to this section. Both substances are biodegradable and are compatible with human body tissue. Chitosan, a derivative of chitin, is carbohydrate with a simple chemical structure. It is potentially useful as fibre and film. More to the point, it has fungicidal and pesticidal properties useful to terrestrial agriculture. In experiments, chitosan stopped the growth of fungi pathogenic to plants, made pea tissue resistant to invasion by fungi, and helped wheat cultivars resist the effects of stem-rotting disease (Hadwiger 1988).
How chitosan exerts its effects is not known. It is thought that chitosan has two modes of action. First, Algal, walls contain some chitosan. When fungi are stressed by unfavorable environmental conditions, they produce more chitosan and become dormant. So, perhaps, chitosan applied to plants may trigger this dormant condition. Second, chitosan may activate disease resistance in plants by stimulating genes' coding for enzymes that digest Algal, cell walls.
Chitin, which is the major component of crustacean and insect shells, is the second most plentiful organic compound on Earth (after cellulose). It is usually considered a wasteproduct by industries that process crabs, shrimp and other crustaceans. An estimated 150,000 tons of chitin is generated per year as waste. Japan is the major processor of chitin and has the largest supply of the substance. However, there is an overabundance of chitin in the world because so far few applications for it have been developed.
Both research institutes and private companies undertake or sponsor wide-ranging programs for screening marine organisms for bioactive secondary metabolites. Screening assays may utilize tumor cell lines, DNA and RNA viruses, pathogenic bacteria, or a combination of the three. As of this writing, more than 2000 secondary metabolites showing bioactivity have been isolated from marine organisms. An illustrative example of what is involved in screening is a project funded by the U.S. National Cancer Institute (NCI) but being carried out by the Australian Institute of Marine Sciences during 1989-91. The cost of the project is $1.05 million per year. The project's objective is for the contractor to collect 1000 species of invertebrate organisms and mollusks per year and submit the specimens to the NCI. A sufficient quantity of each organism has to be collected so 1 kilogram remains after sea water is extracted from the mass of the collected organism. This mass is freeze-dried and
sent to the NCI for screening.
The NCI, in turn, tests each specimen against sixty in vitro cell lines, which represent seven cancer sites; blood cells, brain, colon, kidney, lung, ovary and skin (Ansley 1990). Extracts are tested for their cytotoxic activity. Those that indicate significant differential cytotoxicity are given priority for development. In addition, extracts are tested for anti-AIDS activity using a human Iymphoblastic cell line infected with the live AIDS virus. Preliminary results from the first set of screenings are now being compiled and, according to a NCI spokesman, a number of extracts are cytotoxic. The isolation, purification and identification of the pure secondary metabolite from promising extracts are expected to take an additional five to ten years; then pre-clinical research can begin.
Some pharmaceutical companies operate well-equipped laboratories that have multitiered screening and testing programs. These usually are more extensive than those of the NCI, including in addition to screens for antitumor and anti-viral activities, tests for antiinflammatory, insecticidal and herbicidal activities (Cardellina 1986).
Biofilms and biefouling
When a manmade object is submerged in ocean waters, marine bacteria quickly begin to settle on its surface. In fact, they prefer to grow on a surface rather than in the surrounding water. If the settlement process is allowed to proceed, the initial film consisting mostly of microorganisms soon attracts micro-algae and, eventually, animals such as barnacles and mussels. Surface colonization will damage the object via two types of actions. First, as an ever increasing number of organisms become enmeshed in the biofilm, a noticeable fouling of the surface will occur, leading to encrustation. If the surface in question belongs to a ship, biofouling will increase vessel drag, thereby reducing its speed and increasing fuel consumption. It has been estimated that a 200 micron thick encrustation on a ship's hull can decrease that ship's speed by 20 percent (Curtin 1985).
Second, some of the organisms constituting the biofilm produce metabolic by-products that corrode metals. Sulfate-reducing bacteria, in particular, attack metal surfaces, causing local pitting that can lead to catastrophic failure of equipment (Costerton and Lappin-Scott 1989). Bacterial corrosion is exceedingly damaging; a 1.75-centimeter thick steel plate may be penetrated in about six months. Piers, off-shore drilling structures, and Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion devices are especially prone to damage by organisms constituting the biofilm.
Presently there are two methods for preventing marine organisms from forming a film on submerged substances. First, a surface may be coated by a nonstick coating similar to Teflon. The disadvantages of this method are that these coatings are expensive in themselves, they are costly to apply, and as they age they crack, exposing new sites for marine organisms to colonize. Second, the surface may be protected by an anti-fouling paint, which consists in part of a heavy metal such as copper. The metal slowly dissolves in water, in the process creating a toxic environment for marine organisms. The problems with antifouling paints are that they pollute the marine environment, they are fairly expensive, and they pose hazards to the workers who manufacture and apply them. Of course, once encrustation has occurred, the most common approach is to scrape it off, which is a laborious and damaging operation.
Marine biotechnology research is being directed at solving the problems related to biofilms and biofouling and, concurrently, at securing benefits from the natural biochemical processes underlying these phenomena. Research at Agouron Institute, California, for example, is aimed at clarifying the process of bacterial colonization, particularly identifying the genes that control attachment. Research results may be used to develop coatings that cannot be sensed by the colonizing bacteria. Without this stimulus, they are unable to settle. R&D having similar aims, but taking a different approach, is being undertaken at the Danish Marine Biotechnology Center. There various terpenoid compounds or compounds that contain sulfur have been extracted from marine invertebrates and are being tested in experimental coatings. Some, it is claimed, are as effective as tin oxide in preventing fouling (Cooksey 1991). Yet other scientists, at the University of Maryland, are concentrating on the
second step in biofouling - when invertebrates respond to chemicals exuded by colonizing microorganisms by settling on top of them (Curtin 1985). It may be possible to interfere with the function of the invertebrates' chemical receptors through the release of harmless substances, making it impossible for these organisms to identify favorable settling sites.
Research to solve the nettlesome problem of biofouling can, at the same time, be useful in developing products and processes. In fact, the first industrial chemical to result from marine biotechnology is a bioadhesive, that is, a glue produced by mussels to anchor itself to hard surfaces. The advantage of this glue is that it sets strongly underwater, making it useful for dental and surgical procedures, as well as for certain scientific work. Genex Corporation in Maryland began investigating this glue a few years ago. Genex took the approach of extracting the adhesive from the foot of the blue mussel and then trying to characterize its chemical structure. While Genex scientists were unable to completely unravel the structure, they generated sufficient information about it to enable them to design a synthetic gene that codes for a protein having a structure that is 40 percent similar to the mussel's glue. The gene encoding the glue was introduced into the genome of an
industrial yeast; then the engineered yeast was grown in fermenters where it produced comparatively speaking large quantities of the glue (Morgan 1990). A commercial product, called AdheraCell, was first marketed in April 1990 for use in cell and tissue culture, but was later discontinued due to marketing problems. However, Enzone (Genex's successor) continues to develop a recombinant blue mussel adhesive and has reached the animal testing stage with the product. The results have been excellent so far, with the adhesive being biocompatible and nontoxic (McGuire 1992).
A second company, BioPolymers of Maryland, took the more traditional approach of collecting thousands of the blue mussel, then extracting the adhesive from a gland in the mussel's foot. Approximately 30,000 mussels were processed to produce one gram of the glue, which sold for $90 per milligram (Morgan 1990). At the same time, BioPolymer's chemists studied the glue's structure and were able to generate sufficient information about it to computer-design biosynthetic glues. An endless number of variations of the basic glue structure can be produced, each tailored for a specific application. BioPolymers claimed to have satisfied the needs of about 300 customers for laboratory adhesives. However, BioPolymer's process is now in a legal limbo because the company filed for bankruptcy in 1990.
In addition to the two U.S. firms, Universal Biologicals Limited (in the United Kingdom) markets a protein extract from the mussel Mytilus edulis called Cell Tak. Cell Tak is a transparent material that stays stable for several weeks at 4° C. It will readily coat glass, plastic and metals. Its manufacturer claims that Cell Tak's biological properties makes it a favored material for holding immobilized cells and tissues, thereby simplifying a number of laboratory techniques, such as establishing primary cultures, immunoassays and microinjection (Cell Tak 1990).
Although marine biotechnology research directed at biofilms and biofouling has been going on for about sixty-five years, much remains to be done. In particular, there is a need for research to clarify: (1) the effect that different surfaces have on adhesion by various organisms; (2) the mechanisms of the biological activity whereby an organism irreversibly attaches itself to a surface; (3) the biochemical nature of the substances that organisms produce that act to bind them to the surface (bioadhesives); and (4) the biochemical and biophysiological properties of biofouling organisms (Olson, McCleary and Meeker 1991). In addition, little is known about the differing adhesives produced by the hundreds or thousands of mollusks other than the blue mussel. While most of this research would be basic research, the lesson from the work of Genex and BioPolymer is that one does not need complete information about the bioadhesive's chemical structure or the mussel's genetic control
over the bioadhesive's production to develop products that are useful to transport and specialty chemical industries.
Bioremediation
This general term refers to the use of microorganisms to break down pollutants and wastes in soil or water to harmless or less toxic end-products. End-products may be either simple inorganic chemicals, such as water and carbon dioxide, or less toxic components of the starting material. Microorganisms bioremediate by feeding directly on the organic pollutant, by breaking down the pollutant while they catabolize a primary source of carbon, or by secreting enzymes that break down the pollutant (Portier and Ahmed 1988).
While the emphasis here is on the use of bacteria for bioremediation, it bears mentioning that microalgae and seagrasses may also be used for this purpose. Further, some R&D has been done to combine bacteria and microalgae for waste water treatment; these techniques may be adapted for wider use in bioremediation (Sasson 1988).
The use by man of naturally occurring
microorganisms, such as bacteria and fungi, to break down complex substances is not new. Farmers have composted animal wastes and crop residues since time immemorial not only to rid themselves of these substances, but to simultaneously produce useful byproducts, including methane gas and natural fertilizer. However, attempts to deliberately employ endogenous microorganisms to clean up polluted and waste waters are new endeavors that are under intense development (Martello 1991).
Bioremediation, and its efficient action, depends on a number of conditions including the characteristics of microorganisms present at the site of the process, the chemical makeup of the substance or substances undergoing bioremediation, the availability of nutrients vital to the bioremediating microorganisms, the ambient temperature of the environment where bioremediation takes place, the amount of oxygen available (which determines if the reaction will be aerobic or anaerobic) for the bioremediation reaction, and whether the reaction is taking place in an open or closed system. Each of these conditions require a brief explanation.
MICROORGANISM. Generally speaking, almost any complex chemical substance that is released by natural or human action into the terrestrial or aquatic environment will eventually be attacked by microorganisms. To illustrate, an environmental microbiologist at Louisiana State University has over the last 10 years identified more than 400 different microorganisms and the chemicals they degrade (Martello 1991). Most often, the pollutant that is broken down by a microorganism serves it as a source of food. Thus, petroleum, which is a mixture of hydrocarbons, is a very good source for carbon. Environs that have over time been subject to pollution by petroleum become populated by microorganisms that utilize it as a source of carbon. It is no surprise therefore, that locations where natural seepages of petroleum normally occur, such as the Persian Gulf, are populated by immense numbers of microorganisms that have over thousands of years evolved so they are able to utilize petroleum
as their sole or main source of carbon. Although the timespan is much shorter, similar situations exist in the soils surrounding long-standing manmade petroleumextracting structures or processing plants. It can be seen that large reservoirs of naturally occurring microorganisms suitable for bioremediation may be tapped for development and propagation.
More often than not, bioremediation reactions are mixed-culture reactions; that is, they involve the simultaneous actions of several types of microorganisms. The constituents of mixed-culture reactions vary widely, dependent on the location where it is taking place, the makeup of the reaction mixture, and many other factors. Because of their extreme variability, mixed-culture reactions are extremely difficult to study. Currently the best way to study and research them is through the use of microcosms, which are scaled-down models of environments constructed in the laboratory. A particular microcosm may be designed to duplicate as closely as possible the environment and conditions of an oil-spill site, say the Prince William Sound affected by the E=on Valdez oil spill. This microcosm would include water from the Sound, rock and sand samples from its shore, an aliquot of the spilled oil, microorganism species collected at the site and samples of other life growing in the
water. The ambient temperature of the microcosm would match that of the Sound and it would go through an identical diurnal light cycle. Once the microcosm has been set up, experiments can be performed on it to clarify what happens if one or another physical parameter is changed; if a new microorganism is added or an old one deleted; or if various fertilizers are added or subtracted.
SUBSTRATE. The water containing pollutants may be considered as a substrate for the bioremediation process. The substrate is usually quite complex, containing varied chemical structures and constituent elements. For example, hydrocarbons may have short or long structures; they may consist of a single chain of carbon molecules or have complex branches. They may include heavy metals in their chemical make-up, be chlorinated or brominated, or otherwise contain toxic elements. Pollutants that consist solely of carbon and hydrogen atoms and that have simple structures are usually relatively nontoxic and easily decomposed by microorganisrns. Molecules that are highly branched are difficult to decompose by microbial action; those that contain metals, chlorine and bromine are toxic to animals, plants and microorganisms alike. In view of the many possible substrates and the large number of microbial species and genus that have bioremedial capabilities, the problem of matching
organism to substrate is a considerable one.
NUTRIENTS. Although the substrate will usually provide the major sustenance for the bioremediating microbe, that microbes' continued health will depend on the availability of other nutrients, such as nitrogen and trace elements. Under ordinary conditions, this will not present a problem since the number of microbes normally present at a locale will be limited by the amount of available substrate and nutrients. Under the extraordinary conditions stemming from, for instance, an oil spill, an overabundance of substrate suddenly becomes available, but the amounts of nutrients remains constant. Therefore, large-scale bioremediation cannot be successful unless additional nutrients vital to the massive propagation of the bioremediating microbe are provided. Providing additional nutrients is called fertilization. Since situations will vary, fertilizers will have to be formulated fit the particular conditions of each bioremediation project.
TEMPERATURE. Bioremediation is a complex process involving chemical and fermentation reactions. Chemical reactions are often temperature dependent with the rate of reaction speeding up as temperature increases until a limit is reached. For this reason, bioremediation tends to work better in warmer than colder climates. However, fermentation reactions do not always follow this rule, and when they do, it is to a limited extent. The reason is that microorganisms, which drive fermentation, are the end products of an evolutionary process that has been affected by temperature. Thus microorganisms function best within the temperature range in which they evolved. A petroleum-utilizing microbe that has evolved in the temperate waters of the Persian Gulf would probably not function in the cold waters of Alaska. Nevertheless, in general, bioremediation will usually proceed faster in warmer than colder waters because its rate depends to some extent on physical and chemical processes.
AEROBIC VERSUS ANAEROBIC. Without going into detail, the microorganisms that may be used to decontaminate, for example, the surface waters polluted by an oil spill would be quite different than those used to treat municipal wastes. The first would necessitate the use of aerobic microorganisms-that is, organisms living in the air and deriving most of their energy from metabolic reactions where oxygen is of primary importance. The main catabolic products of aerobic organisms are water and carbon dioxide. Conversely, wastes are usually treated in closed systems by a sequence of fermentation reactions involving both aerobic and anaerobic microorganisms. Anaerobic organisms derive most of their energy from hydrogen; they may in fact be poisoned by oxygen. The main catabolic end product of anaerobic organisms is methane. Most attempts at bioremediation by industry will include both aerobic and anaerobic phases. For instance, aerobic organisms will be used on the surface, while
anaerobic organisms may be employed to treat petroleum constituents that have sunk and are amassing on the sea bed.
CLOSED VERSUS OPEN SYSTEM. A closed system reaction is one that takes place within a confined space, such as in a test tube, flask, or fermenter. An open system reaction is an unconfined one, such as one that is allowed to proceed in the open air or water. Generally speaking, chemical and fermentation reactions that take place in closed systems are easier to perform, study and control. It is therefore understandable that most attempts to use bioremediation for pollution control have been done in closed systems (tanker cargo holds, for instance).
Presently, there are two main approaches to bioremediation of marine pollution (OTA 1991). The first approach is to seed the polluted area with large quantities of microbes that have been propagated in a laboratory or pilot-plant fermenter. The microbes used in this type of endeavor have most often been collected from local sites affected by the same or similar polluting agent. If local biota proves ineffective, petroleum-utilizing microbes collected from other sites may be used to augment efforts. Alternatively, microbes that have had their natural capability for breaking down various pollutants enhanced via classical breeding and selection programs may be employed.
The second approach is to fertilize the polluted area with nutrients that may be lacking or are present in inadequate levels. This is done when it would appear that the local biota can expand in numbers sufficiently for effective bioremediation, if only vital nutrients were made available. Until now fertilization has been the main approach toward bioremediation, resulting in several successes. A combination approach is also possible where seeding is followed by fertilization.
In the future, bioremediation may be done by microbes specifically designed for that purpose. Scientists at several institutes are genetically engineering microbial species to enhance their bioremedial properties. Two approaches predominate. First, metabolic pathways are being altered to improve the efficiency of pollutant degradation. Second, organisms that already are efficient in breaking down one pollutant, or one fraction of petroleum, are being endowed with added capabilities, enabling them to break down pollutants or petroleum fractions that previously were outside their catabolic range. In fact, the first microorganism granted a U.S. patent (in 1981) was one developed by Dr. A. Chakrabarty to simultaneously break down several petroleum fractions. The use of genetically engineered organisms in open systems is not feasible at present, however, since some believe that it would pose unknown risks to the environment and society (biosafety is discussed above).
As is the case of any advanced, complex technology, bioremediation poses difficulties while conferring advantages. In regard to difficulties, the major limitation of the technique is that bioremediation reactions are often poisoned by chemicals or substances that kill microorganisms. This problem is especially acute when treating waste waters from municipal or industrial sources whose composition are not completely known and cannot be predicted. An unscrupulous consumer could, for example, choose to dispose of toxic wastes cheaply by dumping them in a municipality's sewer. If those wastes contained the heavy metal mercury or an organophosphorus pesticide, bioremediation of the effluent takingplace downstream would likely be poisoned.
As to potential advantages, three bear mentioning. First, the employment of bioremediation to process waste water is less costly, in terms of both capital expense and operating costs, than alternative techniques commonly used in primary and secondary waste water treatments. It is significantly less costly than incineration. In general, bioremediation requires rather low capital investment, has low energy consumption, and remains self-sustaining (Portier and Ahmed 1988). Second, bioremediation is more environmentally benign than alternative waste water techniques or techniques used to treat polluted or degraded soil. Bioremediation is thus preferable to landfills, surface impoundment, chemical treatment of toxic dumps, and incineration (Portier and Ahmed 1988). Third, in some cases of marine pollution there is no real alternative to bioremediation, excepting natural processes, because conventional cleanup techniques, consisting of skimming oil from the water surface, mopping
up oil by hand using paper towels, cleaning sand and stone with hightemperature, pressurized water, and employing chemical dispersants and surfactants, would be too damaging to fragile ecosystems.
Related to bioremediation is the use of chemicals produced by living organisms to treat oil spills. Two types of agents have been tested in the field-biological dispersants and surfactants. Dispersants act to separate oil spills into small particles of oil, which then are easily transported from the surface to the water column and sea bottom. Dispersants enhance bioremediation because dispersed oil is more susceptible to attack by microorganisms than is massed oil. On the negative side, dispersants may worsen the effects of the pollutants under treatment because of the persistence and toxicity of the sealed substance. Shallow coastal waters in particular could be severely damaged by dispersants.
Surfactants reduce the surface tension of an oil-water interphase, allowing the oil to emulsify in the water. Surfactants produced by bacteria are nontoxic and biodegradable. When tested in the Prince William Sound, a biological surfactant produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa was found to increase the rate of oil removal from sand and rocks on the beach (Harvey and others 1990). Another biological surfactant, named Emulsan, has been isolated from the marine bacterium Acinetobacter calcoaceticus. It is on the market and is widely used to clean oil holding tanks in tankers and other ships. Emulsan is also being tested in applications for enhanced oil recovery from oil wells and pollution control (Weiner 1985).
Cell culture
Both animal and plant cells may be used in cell culture systems. Yet, in terrestrial agricultural biotechnology, by far the most applications have resulted from plant tissue and cell culture work. These technologies are based on the fact that the cells of many plant species are totipotent; that is, each cell constituting a plant is able to generate a whole plant. Thus, one cell may be micropropagated; that is, by treating the cell in an appropriate manner, it is possible to raise an entire plant from it. The practical implications of this capacity is that one plant can be used to produce thousands of plants with identical genetic makeup without having to wait for it to bear fruit and seeds (UNDP 1989).
The micropropagation of a plant is achieved by removing a sample from its root or shoot (an apical meristem) and cutting it in many small pieces. Each piece is cultured in a test tube or flask with special media that contains plant hormones (this is called in vitro propagation). Cells in these cultured tissues divide many times to form an amorphous mass called callus. A callus can be further subdivided; the subdivisions can be cultured to generate shoots, which in turn can be matured in a green house until ready to be planted in the field. In this fashion, one gram of callus tissue can generate 500 or more plants.
There are two great advantages to the technique of tissue culture: (1) it can be used to rapidly mass propagate a selected plant; and (2) it can be used to select plants with especially desirable characteristics, such as resistance to salinity, climatic extremes, acid soils, toxic minerals and so on.
The main limitation of tissue culture is that success in regenerating plants from tissue culture has only been attained with a few terrestrial plant species, so many commercially important cultivars, such as wheat, barley and oats, have not yet been regenerated.
Cell culture is similar to tissue culture, but goes one step further. Rather than generate plants from callus, the callus tissue is shaken, causing it to shed individual cells. Individual cells are picked and placed in culture flasks, where they grow and subdivide much like bacteria. Cultured cells can be used in two ways: to generate whole plants or to keep them in culture where they secrete natural products that are normally produced by the whole plant.
Cell lines have been developed that produce five times as much of valuable compounds per dry weight of plant material as does the native plant. Products from terrestrial plant cell culture processes range in chemical complexity from simple sugars to complex polymers; they include drugs, dyes, fragrances, flavors and pesticides. Cell culture products are typically low volume, high cost substances. Already over fifty natural products are being produced in plant cell culture at yields equal to or greater than equivalent crops, including quinine, morphine, codeine, cacao, pyrethrum, thaumatin, stevioside, jasmine extract, and digitalis.
When considering algal cell culture, it is important to recognize the difference between this technique and aquaculture. Unlike algal aquaculture, the purpose of which is to grow and harvest a large biomass, algal cell culture systems produce a low volume, high cost substance. The cells, which have been designed and developed to maximize production of that substance, grow and propagate in a closed system, usually a fermenter or tank. The culturist precisely determines the composition of the culture substrate and sets exactly the conditions of fermentation, which is closely monitored throughout the process. The product produced by the cultured cells undergoes a subsequent downstream processing, consisting of recovery, purification and packaging.
While most cell culture work has focussed on microalgae, one project involving macroalgae is worth noting. As noted before, agars are vital to both diagnostic and research laboratories. One scientist has gone as far as to say "...most of the major advances in modern biotechnology would not have been possible without the availability of the polysaccharides from marine macroalgae." (Renn 1990) Unfortunately, the present production level of agar cannot meet world demand. The problems lie with inadequate supplies of agar-producing algae and poor quality control of the natural product due to seasonal variations and differing production methods. To alleviate the unsatisfactory situation, the European Research Coordinating Agency (EUREKA) has agreed to underwrite a four year program costing 4 million ECU (European currency units), or approximately $4.8 million, to develop a cell culture production method to produce agar and agarose. Specifically, cells from red algae that produce
agar will be isolated, characterized and then appropriately genetically engineered to increase production and to grow well in a bioreactor. This program will be an international effort, combining the resources of the British PBL company, the French Pronatec company, and the French Glucide Development Centre. In addition, Pronatec will utilize the molecular biology expertise and resources of the University of Lille and the Institute of Technology, Amiens University. Preliminary development and pilot plant trials will be conducted in Ireland and Spain (Polysaccharides 1991).
A few cell culture systems based on microalgae are already being used by industry for the production of specialty chemicals. For example, the Ethyl Corporation in Louisiana (USA) has developed a process based on a strain of Chlorella that normally synthesizes a relatively large amount of the amino acid proline. Proline is an important intermediary for the production of pharmaceuticals. Research done by the company's scientists has led to the development of a strain that produces 30 percent more praline than does the original. Further, since the praline can be extracted without killing the cell, the same organism may be "milked" again and again Tucker 1985).
Other industrial accomplishments include the French Association for Research in Solar Biology developing microalgae for the production of hydrocarbons and polysaccharides; the U.S. Solar Energy Research Institute's use of microalgae to produce lipids; and the accomplishment by scientists at Amoco Research Center, Indiana, in using genetic engineering techniques to introduce the bacterial genes coding for the rare amino acid octopamine into the green alga Chlamydomonas (Tucker 1985).
The production of high priced products via cell culture can be profitable. Cornmercially available products from algal cell culture include isotopically labeled amino acids and other compounds (up to $1,000 per kilogram), medical phycobiliproteins ($ 10,000 per kilogram), food coloring phycobiliproteins ($100 per kilogram), beta carotene ($300-$500 per kilogram), and various amino acids ($5$100 per kilogram) (Callegari 1989). An industrialist specializing in algal biotechnology estimates that one 130 liter tank can produce $120,000 worth of specialty proteins and sugars per month (Masters 1990). Industry also uses microalgae as the active ingredient in immobilized cell systems, producing via continuous culture hydrogen, acetic acid, dihydroacetone, and gluconic acid, all valuable industrial chemicals. In addition, microalgae can be used to treat wastewater inexpensively.
Very little research has been done on marine animal cell culture. As stated in a recent review, "Tissues of fishes are amenable to the techniques of modern cell culture...and yet this vast resource, comprising of thousands of vertebrate species, remains largely unexplored." (Hightower and Renfro 1988) The reason why marine animal cell culture development is behind marine plant cell culture is that it is more difficult work. Specifically, animal cells do not form callus, the culture media for growing animal cells is more complex and expensive than plant cell culture media, and the culture conditions are more exacting for animal cells than plant cells. Yet, fish cell culture offers researchers unique, useful tools for exploring epithelial ion transport, endocrinological studies, response of physiological systems to stress, tolerance of organisms to heat and cold, cancer biology and environmental toxicology (Rechnitz 1988). In view of its possibilities for research and
applications, it will not be too long before fish and other marine animal cell culture will be common investigatory tools in the laboratory and will be used in development and production systems for vaccines and other pharmacological substances.
Sensors
Sensors are devices that detect a specific substance or organism. The fact of detection is made known by the generation of an electric signal, the production of a unique and measurable chemical substance, or by other means clear to the operator. Sensors also are analytical instruments that react to change, whether it is a change in temperature, chemi cal composition of reactants or substrate, or another parameter. Sensors may have a dual function; for example, a sensor initially may detect the presence of a substance and then sense changes in that substance's concentration or amount as a reaction proceeds.
Conventional sensors commonly employed in laboratories and industry may range in complexity from temperature gauges and pH meters to radioimmunoassay and gas chromatography. However, a new type of sensor has recently been developed, namely the biosensor. A typical biosensor consists of an immobilized biological material-such as an enzyme, antibody, or a whole cell-in contact with a transducer or signal-generating element, which is a device that converts the information received from the biological material into some sort of signal, usually an electric current. Data processing equipment gauge the reaction by quantifying the signal, providing results based on the data received within seconds or minutes.
Two types of biosensors hold particular interest for marine biotechnology. The first is the chemoreceptor, the heart of which consists of biomolecular assemblies involved in physiological functions, such as smell and taste, and in metabolic and neural biochemical pathways. One type of chemoreceptor sensor of potential value utilizes the sensing antennule removed from the crab. The crab uses this organ to continually monitor water for dissolved substances ranging in chemical complexity from simple salts to pheromones Hormones that attract the opposite sex). In the laboratory, antennules dissected from crabs and connected to potentiometers have exhibited instantaneous quantitative responses to various amino acids, hormones, nucleotides, drugs and toxins (Rechnitz 1988).
The second type is the immunological sensor. A monoclonal or polyclonal antibody (see page 7) or a DNA probe is the molecular recognition element in this biosensor. Modern detection kits based on one or another monoclonal or polyclonal antibody have been developed to detect many types of pathogenic bacteria, including those causing cholera, shigellosis and typhoid fever. These kits are highly specific, accurate, easy to use and give results in a matter of four to twelve hours.
The second product, the DNA probe, is the most exact and definitive way of identifying the type or even the strain, of virus, bacteria, or parasite that causes disease in animals and plants. This kind of identification depends on a Reverse engineering" feat; a specific sequence of the genome of virus, bacteria, or parasite is determined, then a complementary sequence is synthesized. This sequence in effect becomes the probe for testing analyses of unknown composition. This probe, which is labelled with radioactivity or with biotin, attaches itself to the specific sequence that gave rise to it. The fact of attachment is detected through a procedure that relies on chemical or radiological reactions. A battery of such diagnostic probes can be put together in a kit, enabling the operator to, for example, rapidly identify prevalent disease agents that inhabit the waters proximate to a city or region. As is the case with monoclonal antibodies, test results can be generated in a
matter of four to twelve hours.
The major advantage of biosensors over conventional sensors are that they are easier to use in some specific applications, give results quickly, can be more sensitive, and are more selective. For example, in industrial bioprocess control biosensors are used for real time monitoring of complex reactions, giving technicians and engineers timely warning to adjust reaction rates to achieve maximum production. As the technology advances, rugged, inexpensive, accurate biosensors will be developed for field use, possibly to the point where they will be disposable after being used a single time. A large variety of biosensors will be used for a plethora of purposes in biotechnology industry, food production, agricultural projects, environmental studies, and medicine and veterinary medicine.
An example of a project in which biosensors will play a vital role is one under way in Japan. In 1990, the Japanese Fisheries Agency launched a five year biotechnology-based project to prevent damage to macroalgae aquaculture from red tides (Five-year 1990). Red tides are so called because periodically dinoflagellates will bloom (proliferate in large numbers), giving a reddish sheen to the ocean water where they grow. Since many strains of dinoflagellates produce deadly toxins, algae (as well as marine animals such as bivalves) cannot be harvested from waters affected by red tide. Damage to aquaculture can run into the billions of yens.
The project has two aspects. First, previous research has demonstrated the existence of some marine bacterial species that promote the bloom of dinoflagellates and others that retard it. The intent is to identify each of the various retarding microbial species and determine which species retards which dinoflagellate. Next, researchers will attempt to recover, identify and characterize the substance, or substances, these organisms secrete that retard dinoflagellate growth and propagation. Once this has been done, scientists will try to mass produce this substance by appropriately genetically engineered bacteria. The hope is that the inhibiting substance will prove suitable for spreading over an area affected by the red tide.
Second, researchers will seek to identify each of the dinoflagellate strains that constitute the red tide. Monoclonal antibodies will thereupon be constructed for each strain. Once this has been accomplished, waters threatened or affected by red tide can be sampled and the causative dinoflagellates be identified quickly. Timely treatment can then be instituted with the correct inhibiting substance.
The Japanese project has important implications for developing countries because many are affected by red tides. For example, the Chilean Under-Minister of Fisheries, Mr. Andres Couve has claimed that the red tide is more of a threat to his country than cholera. He notes that in 1991, 41 Chileans became sick with cholera, but over 300 persons were poisoned by red tide (Couve 1992). The latter number is probably an underestimation since many who consumed contaminated mollusks did not report their sickness or were misdiagnosed.
The marine environment is highly variable and exceedingly complex. The interrelationships in the oceans between biological activity and physical and chemical processes are largely unknown. Yet they must be understood before events of global ecological significance can be reliably predicted and their effects measured. While much of the ocean surface and the overlying atmosphere is continuously monitored by sensors emplaced on anchored and free-floating buoys, on-site sampling, or remote sensing methods, biological and chemical activity in the water itself is difficult to detect and measure by present technologies. As a result, there is a dearth of data on inorganic and organic pollutants that are present in ocean water (and often have poor water solubility and are therefore present in low concentrations) and on intact microorganisms that inhabit waters on a temporary or permanent basis. Clearly, many specific sensors need to be developed to detect and measure all the varied
biological and chemical processes in the marine environment so they can be adequately studied.
Biological oceanography (including public health)
Biological oceanography is the study of "the ecological relationships of organisms - their interactions with other organisms and with the features of their environment, particularly larger scale features such as currents, bottom topography, and water mass characteristics" (NRC 1985). The interrelationships between the environment and its microbial inhabitants is the concern of a scientific field called microbial ecology (Updegraff 1991). The interactions between microbial ecology and humans fall within the purview of a new scientific specialty called environmental toxicology.
As was noted in Chapter 1, biological oceanography, while extremely important, is a field that has been relatively neglected due to limitations inherent to present-day detection and measurement techniques. Biotechnology techniques that are now used on land can be adapted or further developed to study problems in biological oceanography. As has been described in a recent report:
[Biotechnology] makes possible the rapid identification and quantification of species, stocks and populations of marine organisms from microscopic viruses and bacteria to the largest marine mammal; identification of the mechanisms regulating the reproduction, development, evolution, growth and distribution of marine organisms; identification of the mechanisms controlling the interaction of marine organisms with one another and with their environment; and manipulation of these regulatory mechanisms for enhanced production of valuable marine resources, for bioremediation of environmental insults, and possibly even for the bioremediation of changes in greenhouse gas accumulation and the rate and extent of climatic change (Initiative 1990).
The report delineates three areas in biological oceanography that can benefit from the application of biotechnology. First, biotechnology techniques can be used to increase our understanding of how the distribution, abundance and growth rates of marine populations are regulated. Techniques such as restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), DNA/DNA hybridization and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) will permit scientists to characterize the genetic makeup of populations, to perform comparative analysis of different populations, and to discern patterns in genetic variation within species. The practical applications from increased knowledge will be used to identify and track larval forms of invertebrates; identify the country of origin of commercially important fish stocks, such as salmon; develop plasmids in macroalgae as vectors; and to characterize marine microbial populations. The last listed is particularly important since researchers are able to culture only about 1
percent of marine bacterial species.
Second, biotechnology techniques, particularly rDNA and PCR, may be employed to research how marine organisms adapt to their varied environs, clarify interactions between species, map the evolution of species, and explain the symbiotic relationships between organisms. There are many possibilities for applications from this research. Some have already been discussed; for example, by clarifying the genetic control over the production of enzymes by extremophiles, new possibilities open up to manufacture unique enzymes useful to industry. Other possibilities for terrestrial agriculture are discussed in the next section. In addition, gene probes can be used to identify intermediate life stages of important organisms that now are unknown, such as shellfish; the chemical signals that regulate settling and metamorphosis in shellfish can be identified and used in aquaculture; and the genetic control over the production of adhesives by mollusks can be elucidated, opening up
possibilities for new products.
Third, biotechnology techniques may be employed to increase our understanding of the factors that regulate interactions between organisms and the environment. Specifically, research can be aimed to research primary productivity, which is the all-important process whereby inorganic carbon is taken up by organisms (mostly bacteria and plants) and converted by them using energy from the sun into organic carbon, which in turn is the basis for all forms of life. Sophisticated instruments and techniques used in biotechnology research, such as big-optics, flow cytometry, immunofluorescence probes and biological markers, can be used to identify and quantify microbial primary producers, including microplankton (which have recently been proven to be responsible for most of the production in the oceans). This research is of interest because it clarifies one aspect of impact of microbial activity in the oceans and the regulation of gas exchange between air and sea. This in turn bears on
the interrelationship of the cycles of nitrogen, phosphorous, oxygen and others that interact with the carbon cycle; which is a vital determinant of global climatic change and the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the biosphere.
Environmental toxicology has particular importance in matters related to the coastal zone, because this is where land meets sea, where most of the world's human population lives, and whose terrestrial and marine environs teem with microorganisms. To illustrate, research done at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts has shown that more than one million bacteria can inhabit one milliliter of water and almost one billion bacteria can be found in one gram of beach sand.
In addition to the microbial populations "naturally" inhabiting beaches and coastal waters, microorganisms are continuously introduced to these settings through human activities. It is unquestioned that huge quantities of raw sewage and other waste is dumped untreated in the oceans every day. Some of the consequences of this massive pollution may become discernable rapidly, as has been shown in Chile. There the uncontrolled discharge of large amounts of untreated wastes along Chile's 4,200-kilometer long coastline has led to many cases among swimmers of hepatitis A and E, as well as a few hundred cases of cholera (Rojas 1991). In addition, banks of mollusks (clams, mussels, oysters and piures) are located just off shore where waste water is dumped. Many Chileans have become sick after eating them.
However, in most instances the ultimate effects of wastes dumped in the oceans are unknown. We know little, for example, about the fate of the many types of pathogens released in the marine environment, the interactions between bacterial pathogens and marine viruses, and the probability of genes from bacterial pathogens dispersing widely. One can theorize that persons who are exposed to large numbers of bacterial and viral pathogens inhabiting waters directly (for example, while swimming or washing) or indirectly (as a result of, for example, eating marine animals that have been harvested from contaminated or polluted waters) will suffer increased rates of morbidity and mortality, but hard data on the matter is lacking. The major problem is the difficulty have with collecting and identifying pathogens in the oceans, then establishing causeeffect relationships between pathogens and health events. The development and marketing of detectors (see above) and precise, easy-touse
diagnostic kits based on monoclonal antibodies and DNA probes will help investigators perform the basic research that would clarify the effects that contaminated and polluted sea water have on public health.
Shifting our focus from environmental toxicology to marine products of public health significance, one of the earliest applications from "classical" marine biotechnology is related to the detection of toxins important to public health. It stems from a 1955 discovery that the blood from the horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus, would clot when mixed with endotoxin produced by certain bacteria called gram-negative bacteria (so named because they color red when stained according to a process developed by C. Gram). A purified extract of the blood suitable for diagnostic work was prepared in 1964 and was named Limulus amebocyte Iysate (LAL). After the large pharmaceutical companies showed their disinterest in LAL, its developer started his own company to commercialize it. Thus, in 1974, the company Associates of Cape Cod, Inc., was formed, and in 1977 it was granted a license by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to market the product. The major application of LAL today is in
the testing of injectable pharmaceutical products for endotoxins, which it can detect at levels lower than the pyrogenic level. Its use as a diagnostic tool is limited, however, because it does not differentiate between the many types of endotoxins that may be secreted by bacteria (Novitsky 1984).
To conclude this section, two subjects that are related to possible marine biotechnology applications for public health are noted. The first is that marine animals offer themselves as models in biomedical research. For example, the icefish, which lacks red blood and hemoglobin, may be used to study anemia; the immunoprotective mechanisms of sharks, which rarely suffer from cancer, may be used to develop cancer treatments; the shark also has an extremely high blood level of urea that may be used to study uremia in humans; and the sea cucumber, whose peritoneum (abdominal cavity) is filled with bacteria, is able to protect itself from peritonitis (Smith 1988).
Second, as is well known, seafoods are consumed throughout the world, providing high quality protein and other important dietary constituents. However, seafoods can be the source of foodborne diseases due to infectious organisms or toxins. Seafoods have been implicated as the vehicles for 10 percent of all foodborne diseases in the United States, 7.6 percent in Canada, and 13.2 percent in the Netherlands (Huss 1991). There is intense interest in industry to develop biosensor kits designed to detect low numbers or levels of specific pathogens and toxins in seafood. Kits based on monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies seem to hold particular promise in the short term. As kits are marketed and used routinely in the seafood industry, contaminated batches of seafood will be detected early and prevented from reaching consumers. A marked reduction in the incidence of foodborne diseases will undoubtedly follow, saving millions of dollars in health costs and preventing much misery.
Terrestrial agriculture
Cyanobacter and other microalgae, which are normally present in wet soils, possess the valuable attributes of nitrogen fixation, ability to stabilize soil aggregates, and the ability to produce plant growth regulators. Thus it is no surprise that these aquatic organisms, especially the cyanobacter Azolla, have been used for a long time by farmers in India and southeast Asia as green fertilizer. More recently, mass culture technology has been adapted in India to produce free-living cyanobacteria for use as biofertilizer and soil conditioner. The process is based on starter cultures produced by the Indian Agricultural Research Institute; the fertilizer itself is distributed as dried flakes. Cost analysis of cyanobacter biofertilizer use versus chemical fertilizer shows conclusively the superiority of the first (Melting 1989). While the development of microalgae as biofertilizer (also called algalization) has so far been done by researchers using traditional research methods,
future research on strain selection and improvement could be significantly advanced through the employment of advanced biotechnology techniques.
Compared to terrestrial life, marine organisms possess characteristics that in some cases are unique, in others merely unusual. For example, the world's most salt-tolerant plant appears to be a certain genus of Danaliella that inhabits the Dead Sea, which contains 29 percent salt (Weiner 1985). The fastest growing plant may well be the giant kelp, which has an estimated maximum growth rate of 65 centimeters per day (Robinson 1985). And, as mentioned, the winter flounder survives a subzero temperatures that would kill most animals, including other fish. One cannot but wonder, if it were possible to do so, whether the transfer of certain characteristics inherent to marine animals and plants would benefit their terrestrial counterparts.
Some researchers are trying to answer this question. For instance, a team at Canada's Plant Biotechnology Institute, Saskatchewan, is trying to improve the cold hardiness of crops subject to damage from frosts that may unexpectedly occur in the early spring and late fall (Cutler, Saleem and Georges 1989). The team has taken a three-phase approach in tackling the project. First, its members collected the anti-freeze protein from flounder. The protein was used to infiltrate different plants, which were subjected to freezing. The freezing point of leaves of treated plants was found to be 1.8° C lower than untreated controls. Second, laboratory findings were evaluated in terms of practical field applications. Based on meteorological data collected over five years in Saskatchewan, the lowering of the freezing point of crop plants from oº to -2° C would decrease the number of damaging frosts from 22 to 5. The third phase, which is a proposed one, involves introducing the gene
coding for the anti-freeze protein into an appropriate crop plant. The researchers involved in the project believe they can use the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens as a vector for introducing the gene into the target plan. However, a key problem remains to be solved by the Canadian group, namely, to clarify the regulatory sequence that controls the expression of the anti-freeze gene. The natural gene is controlled by a sequence that works only in the fish, so finding one that works in the plant will be the next step.
A similar problem may have been solved by the U.S. company DNA Plant Technology Corporation in New Jersey. Company officials claim to have synthesized the flounder antifreeze gene and have inserted it in yeast and higher plants, where it was expressed. The transformed yeast's viability after freezing was increased by 200 to 300 percent, a quality which will be useful for bakeries that produce frozen dough products. In regard to higher plants, the company is asking the USDA for permission to field test a transgenic tomato containing the gene. It is hoped that fruits and vegetables containing the gene will retain most of their fresh character after freezing and thawing (DNAP plants 1991).
These findings have implications for other parts of the world. It is estimated that, for example, California and Florida citrus fruit agriculture, which is sometimes devastated by unseasonal frosts, would save millions of dollars if the citrus trees were able to survive 2 ° C colder temperatures than they can now. It does not take much imagination to realize that large areas in developing countries, such as Afghanistan, Chile, Kenya, Nepal and Peru, would benefit greatly if crops planted in soils located at high altitudes could be protected from frost.
The scientific or technical area where marine biotechnology immediately intersects with terrestrial agriculture is saline agriculture. In fact, a tremendous amount of research is being directed at developing plants that are salttolerant or require salt water for life (halophytes). The significant advances that have been achieved in these areas of research have been reviewed by the NAS (BOSTID 1990). More recently, a terrestrial halophyte was evaluated after six years of field trials in the Sonora desert, Mexico, where conditions of temperature extremes and dryness are recorded. The results were extremely promising; the halophyte Salicornia bigelovii was found to be "...a potentially valuable new high-yielding oilseed crop for these regions, yielding a vegetable oil high in unsaturated fatty acids, which is amenable to commercial oilseed extraction methods" (Glenn and others 1991).
This emerging area in agriculture is of special importance to developing countries because arable lands are fully utilized in most of these countries, particularly those that are densely populated, while, concurrently, huge tracts of what are termed marginal lands are not used, or are underutilized, because for reasons of economy or unavailability they cannot be irrigated by fresh water. In addition, unsound irrigation practices have led to the degrading of tracts of land due to the salinization of soil. Modern biotechnology now makes it possible to utilize the so-called "marginal" lands by providing researchers with the tools to develop crop plants that thrive when irrigated by brackish or salt water. Once this development has occurred, the concept of marginal lands will change; henceforth the problem will be one of matching a land having certain chemical and physical characteristics with a crop that is best suited to grow where these characteristics are present.
<section>Chapter 4</section>
<section>Options in marine biotechnology for developing countries</section>
In view of the limited resources available to most developing countries, R&D likely to produce applications in the short term (one to three years) and medium term (three to six years) would probably have higher priority than long-term projects. Further, two important factors must be taken into account when considering options in marine biotechnology for a developing country: (1) the level of scientific or technical capability in the country in biology, bioscience and biotechnology, as well as in applied areas, such as aquaculture and fisheries; and (2) the potential of prospective R&D resulting in applications for that country in the short to medium term. The two factors need to be considered in detail.
<section>Existing scientific and technical capabilities</section>
As is made clear in Appendix A, research institutes in the fields of marine biology and marine biotechnology-related areas are scattered throughout the developing world. Undoubtedly, their capabilities vary widely; for example, many have the capability to perform rudimentary experiments in marine biology, while a few could take on complex projects such as studying and developing transgenic fish. Most of these research institutes would thus fall at the lower end of the capability gradient depicted in Figure 3. The progression from capability to perform simple experiments in biology to being able to clone genes is not accomplished easily; the capability required for R&D involving transgenic organisms is on an order of one or two magnitudes more demanding in terms of expertise and equipment than are "classical" investigations in biology and bioscience. While recognizing this fact, we nevertheless hold that countries whose bioscientific capability is low could begin working in
marine biotechnology (or biotechnology-related) R&D somewhere along the gradient, depending on resident expertise and available resources. Specific examples that support this contention are provided in the next section.
When moving from the scientific underpinnings of marine biotechnology to its more applied aspects, many developing countries possessing or controlling marine tracts have established significant marine-related industries, usually aquaculture or fisheries. These industries may range in complexity from simple (for example, a shrimp pond operated by a family) to complex (for example, a facility consisting of pools for growing algae, fish or shrimp, a pumping system for circulating fresh salt water, and a processing plant). Some of the larger, more diversified operations may include a research unit, staffed by a few technicians, who are responsible for solving immediate problems pertaining to water quality control, diseases affecting cultured animals and plants, feed and nutrition, and waste management.
For countries that possess a marine industry beyond the "family farm stage" and that wish to develop capabilities in marine biotechnology, two options exist. First, aquaculture enterprises that have research units can be encouraged to expand and upgrade by hiring doctoral-level natural scientists and purchasing the scientific equipment required to perform applied R&D. The home government may stimulate such development by granting appropriate subsidies, allowing firms tax credits, and instituting other incentives. Second, universities and research institutes involved in marine matters can set up out reach programs through which their research units establish working relations with industry. The underlying basis for cooperation would be that both sides benefit. The industry could, for instance, provide sites for field research, while the research institution helps industry by performing problem-solving research or research aimed at enhancing production. Implementing either
option, or a mix of the two, would help countries gain their goal.
Some countries may be fortunate in that their scientific institutes already have significant capabilities in biotechnology and their marine industry has applied skills in aquaculture or other areas. In these cases, the major emphasis of government initiatives might be to bridge the gap between the research establishment and the applied sector by fostering joint projects between them (Zilinskas 1989).
<section>Applications of marine biotechnology in the short and medium terms</section>
Based on the history of terrestrial biotechnology development and assuming that marine biotechnology will undergo a similar growth and maturation process, it is possible to estimate when applications are likely to emerge from R&D in each of the nine subareas of marine biotechnology we listed in Chapter 3 (aquaculture, marine animal health, marine natural products, biofilm or bioadhesion, bioremediation, cell culture, biosensors, public health, and terrestrial agriculture).
Aquaculture
In general, aquaculture presents many opportunities for developing countries in traditional areas; to increase their food supplies, improve the nutritional status of their populations and generate export earnings. Countries in Asia and Latin America have seized on these opportunities and have as a result benefitted in real economic terms (Csavas 1989; Ferdouse 1990; Gotfrit 1990;
Singh 1991; Yap 1990). In addition, aquaculture may be undertaken to generate new applications including, for example, to produce marine leather from large fish such as seabass (barramundi) (Selwood 1992), salt water pearls (McElroy 1990) and fresh water pearls (Pearls 1992). The expansion of aquaculture, however, will take place through the employment of mostly well-known traditional technologies, amplified at times by tissue culture.
What is the future role of advanced biotechnology in aquaculture in the developing countries? One role, of course, is in the control of animal diseases, which is dealt with in the next section. Another is to develop triploid and transgenic fish or shellfish specifically for aquaculture, for the purpose of increasing yields or to produce a superior product: one that is more attractive, better tasting and more nutritious than present stock. Is this proposal realistic?
Many institutions in developing countries have, or could shortly develop, the R&D capability to produce triploid oysters and other mollusks. This could be a worthwhile endeavor because industrial countries whose populations relish mollusks are facing decreased production due to the shrinkage of areas where they may be cultured, increased pollution that kills off the animals through disease, and high labor costs. This opens up new possibilities for Asian and Pacific countries to culture mollusks and export them to receptive markets in Europe, Japan and North America (Newkirk 1991). A multi-year attempt to do so is in fact under way now in Western Samoa. About three years ago, the South Pacific Aquaculture Developments Project, based in Fiji, imported diploid and triploid oysters, which were cultured locally. Of the first batch, all the diploid forms died after spawning, but 10 percent of the triploids were harvested and sold at a premium price. The commercial viability of the
project is now being assessed by the Western Samoan government (More 1992). The findings would have implications for many countries in the region that control large ocean tracts and do not have to contend with polluted waters. If it is deemed economically viable to culture mollusks in the South Pacific, it would probably be advantageous to develop an indigenous R&D capability to produce triploids, thereby foregoing the need to import them.
Although transgenic fish have been developed with favorable growth characteristics, they are not likely to be cultured on a large scale until questions about their safety as human food have been settled and the risks they may pose to the environment if accidentally released assessed. The food safety issue can be settled through testing carried out on animals raised in the laboratory. But before field testing can commence, the environmental impact of the possible release of the transgenic fish has to be assessed. The results from the assessment would be the basis for regulations governing field testing, which would have to be formulated and implemented by the appropriate national executive and legislative bodies. The undertaking of appropriate safety testing of transgenic animals and the development of a regulatory regime are likely to take a long time. Therefore, significant applications from the development of transgenic fish, shellfish or mollusks cannot be expected in the
short or medium term.
Many types of terrestrial transgenic plants have been developed and have been, or are being, field tested. Several industrial countries have formulated regulations governing these tests; these regulations would most probably apply to the field testing of transgenic macroalgae in closed systems. Although as far as we know no transgenic macro-algae has been sufficiently developed for field testing, such an advance is likely not too far off in time. For instance, a first test could involve a transgenic macro-algal strain that has been developed to overproduce agar. In view of the more relaxed rules governing the testing of transgenic plants in, for example, greenhouses, and the less stringent safety standards that have to be met by products not intended for human consumption, securing a permit to perform the testing of a transgenic macro-algae in a closed system should not prove difficult to procure. But a proposed transplantation of the transgenic macro-algal species to open
waters would be likely to raise difficult issues, as discussed on pages 18. Environmental impact assessments would have to convincingly demonstrate that the transgenic algal strain would pose no hazard to the environment, something that would take years to do. We conclude that until an adequate regulatory regime is in place, which is likely to take at least five years, no one should culture transgenic macro-algae in open systems. The propagation of transgenic macro-algae in a closed system would probably not be economically feasible. (The culture of microalgae is discussed below, in the section on cell culture.)
Marine animal health
Fish, crustacean and mollusc aquaculture is important to many developing countries, both as a source of high quality protein and to generate export earnings. A wide variety of marine species are being cultured, for example, in Asia fifty-two finfish, sixty-three mollusc, eighteen crustacean, and forty seaweed species are culture in one or more countries of the region (Csavas 1989). Considering the damage that infectious diseases have caused to the aquaculture industry, deploying marine biotechnology for R&D leading to vaccines against diseases common in aquaculture seems worthwhile. Some R&D is being expended for this purpose. As noted, several vaccines developed via conventional means are available to protect fish and lobster from infectious diseases, and a recombinant killed type vaccine against IHN has been developed and is close to field testing. However, in view of the diversity of marine life being cultured, which is susceptible to numerous diseases, and considering
the present level of effort, much remains to be done in the animal health area.
The large scale field testing of several genetically engineered terrestrial animal vaccines, including vaccines against rabies and foot-and-mouth disease, is now taking place in several nations. Considering that the regulations for field testing animal vaccines are in place, permission to test a recombinant killed type fish vaccine should not prove difficult secure in the United States The development of simile* vaccines is taking place in other countries, including England and Norway. Field testing this type of vaccine in England will probably not present a problem, but many Norwegian citizens appear to be suspicious about advanced biotechnology, so public opinion may prevent field testing in that country.
It is probable that R&D is under way in industrialized countries on recombinant attenuated type vaccines. For example, a vaccine may be based on a disease organism that has been attenuated by researchers removing from its genome genes that code for virulence. This organism would presumably elicit an antibody response in the host without causing disease. However, since the vaccine is constituted by living organisms, its proposed testing would present problems since the vaccine's safety must be proved.
From a technical viewpoint, R&D in some of the more advanced developing countries, such as China, India, Thailand and others could be directed at producing recombinant vaccines against fish diseases, and results would probably be realized in the short term. If the vaccine is a killed type, its testing would probably be permitted in most of these countries as long as established testing protocols were followed and local laws were adhered to. If the new vaccines proved efficacious, local aquaculture industry would benefit because the prevention of disease would increase yields of treated animals. In addition, if vaccines were developed that protected animals from bacterial diseases, antibiotic usage in aquaculture would decline, reducing risks to public health and environment.
Shrimp aquaculture generates significant export earnings for several Asian and Latin American countries. To illustrate, worldwide aquaculture production of shrimp reached an estimated record 690,100 tons in 1991; the largest producers were China (145,000 tons), Indonesia (140,000 tons), Thailand (110,000 tons), Ecuador (100,000 tons) and India (35,000 tons) (Record year 1992). Infectious shrimp diseases have spread among these countries, causing enormous economic damage (see page 32 and following). Yet, no vaccines are available to prevent shrimp diseases. The reason is that little is known about the immunological defense systems of most crustacean species. The basic research that could provide this information is lagging, mostly because these problems have little relevance to researchers in the industrial countries. Therefore, this is one research area in which scientists in the developing countries where shrimp aquaculture is important could excel. However, this research
would be mostly basic research, so applications should not be expected until the medium or long term.
Little is known about the immunological defense systems of mollusks. How to best protect these animals from diseases is therefore still an open question. However, the major constraints to mollusc aquaculture does not seem to be disease, but manmade pollution of the mollusc natural environment and the occurrence of red tides and other algal blooms, which render the animal inedible due to it accumulating toxins (Lovatelli 1990). These problems fall under the purview of biological oceanography, below.
Marine natural products
Several wide-ranging, large-scale projects are under way in the tropical and semitropical seas to collect marine animals, plants and microorganisms and screen them for natural products useful as specialty chemicals or pharmaceuticals. The first phase, that of collection, may be relatively easily done if surface and sub-surface organisms are to be collected, or if the target organisms live in accessible sites, such as mudflats or shallow seabeds. This type of collection can be undertaken by most countries. However, some collection will be costly because it is difficult to perform, for example, the collecting and screening of extremophiles. Since very few countries are by themselves equipped to undertake the collecting of organisms in the abyssal environs, this type of activity encourages joint, cooperative efforts between countries wherein resources and expenses are shared.
The comprehensive screening of organisms for valuable natural products is a costly and technologically difficult activity. As a result, investigators tend to design screening programs that cover a class or category of activities; that is, antibiotic, antiviral, pesticidal or toxin compounds. Examples of such programs were described above, including that by the NCI to identify possible anticancer and anti-viral substances. In view of the difficulties attendant to screening, projects that seek to collect and screen animals, plants or microorganism should be cooperative projects, involving both public institutes and private companies that already have experience in this type of endeavor. It bears mentioning here that the screening for natural products having interesting properties is done in the same manner whether the organism under investigation is of marine or terrestrial origin.
Screening is, of course, only the first step of a long development process. The experience of pharmaceutical companies indicates that out of 10,000 screenings only 20-30 compounds will be identified as possessing interesting bioactivity. These compounds are subject to a long, involved and expensive process to develop and test them. Eventually, one compound ends up as a marketable product. The demands of this development process are particularly high if the substance of interest is intended for human use. For example, as of this writing, Didemnin B (see page 36) is still undergoing clinical trials twelve years after discovery. If its developers successfully conclude initial clinical trials, another five years or so might pass before they complete advanced clinical trials and the drug is licensed. The entire research, development and testing process could cost $150 million or more, which must be paid up front before the drug is marketed. The process to develop a substance for
use other than as a pharmaceutical or food additive would be much less costly. Thus, the cost to develop a pesticide or animal feed additive may be about $10-$20 million.
Clearly options vary widely in the natural products area. Almost all countries possess the capability to collect organisms from easily accessible sites; a few of these countries are able to screen the collections in some manner. If a developing country wishes its research institutions to do more than rudimentary investigations, its researchers and laboratories may consider entering into mutually beneficial cooperative agreements with counterparts in industrialized countries. International cooperation is particularly important in cases when a substance shows promising activity against dread diseases, such as cancer and AIDS, or illnesses affecting the cardiovascular system. In these cases risks may be high (in terms of the substance not fulfilling its initial promise), but if testing is successful, the payoff probably will be bountiful. However it is done, natural products development is a long term effort.
There are two possible exceptions to the foregoing. The first relates to toxins. Purified marine toxins costs thousands of dollars per milligram, yet there is an unsatisfied world market for them. Due to the market demand for these substances, countries possessing tracts in the tropical seas should consider making the investment necessary to be able to collect, screen and process marine organisms rich in toxins. It would be vital to involve private industry in such endeavors. The second is chitin R&D Chitin is abundant in much of the developing world; sometimes it is a significant local pollutant. Its derivative chitosan is therefore an inexpensive resource that, as we have seen, has possible applications in agriculture. For these reasons, research aimed at clarifying chitosan's pesticidal properties should be encouraged as it would be likely to lead to important applications in the medium term. Locally produced and processed chitosan could replace imported, polluting
chemical pesticides. However, large investments in chitin processing and chitosan production should not be made until the market demand for these substances has been determined.
It bears mentioning that there undoubtedly are possibilities for a nation to take up R&D that combines two sub-areas; for example, aquaculture and natural products development. To illustrate, more than 5000 species of sponges exist worldwide, out of which about 15 have commercial value. Sponges now have limited uses, mainly for pottery making, painting, polishing and washing. Total world production is 160-270 tons per year; Tunisia and Cuba are the main producing countries (Josupeit 1991). As was mentioned above, however, sponges are rich sources for interesting natural products, including some that have been developed to the point where they are undergoing clinical testing.
In general, sponges are relatively easy to cultivate, reaching commercial size in five to seven years. It should be feasible to culture species of sponges that are the source of valuable natural products. The experience of Micronesia indicates that it costs $269 over two years to culture a unit of sponges, where the unit consists of 1188 sponges. The cost of producing 1 kilogram of sponge comes out to $3 (Shang 1991). It can be seen that if and when a sponge species is proven to be the source of a commercial product, it probably would make economic sense to establish an enterprise that would undertake the largescale culturing of the sponge, would harvest and clean it, then process it to isolate and recover the desired natural product. In addition, such an operation would be environmentally benign because sponge aquaculture is essentially nonpolluting and the availability of cultured sponges would prevent unscrupulous collectors from depleting wild species.
Biofilms and biofouling
The study of the biofouling process, and the resulting biofilm, consists mostly of basic research to explain the settling phenomena and the molecular biology and biochemistry of organism-surface interfacing. Research findings could be applied to protect ship hull's and marine structures from encrustation, while eliminating marine paints that are sources of pollutants. However, in view of the difficulties inherent to this research and considering the scarcity of data in this area, biofouling investigations are not likely to lead to applications in the short and medium term.
The one exception to the foregoing is research centering on biological adhesives from marine organisms. As we have mentioned, some information exists about mussel adhesives, including the identification of some genes that control for their production and the elucidation of parts of the chemical structure of the adhesive itself. Researchers in some developing country institutions should be able to build on the already existing scientific base in this area, and add original findings from research on indigenous marine organisms. By taking this short cut, applications in the marine adhesive area could be realized in the medium term. We note, however, that if the intended application is for human use, for applications in surgery or dentistry for example, the same considerations regarding safety and clinical trials that were discussed under pharmaceuticals would apply.
Bioremediation
Effective bioremediation technologies, which most often depend on the actions of naturally occurring microorganisms, have been developed and their methodology has been published. Developing country scientists who have a background in areas such as waste water treatment and anaerobic fermentation could be trained in bioremediation technologies in six to twelve months. If appropriately trained scientists are available, they could quickly turn their skills to developing and adapting existing bioremediation technologies for indigenous use. The actual application of bioremediation to clean up already polluted coasts, or to alleviate the effects of future pollution could commence in the short term. Once experts have been trained and are working in well-equipped facilities, original R&D to, for example, recover, investigate and evaluate new groups of pollutant-destroying microorganisms could also commence in the short term; applications from this work may be achieved in the medium
term.
Some research teams in the more advanced developed countries are undoubtedly technically capable of genetically engineering pollutant-degrading microorganisms for higher efficiency or a broader range of activity. However, questions about the possible risks that these organisms may pose to the environment would have to be resolved before they are tested. Only then could countries formulate adequate regulations governing the field testing of the new organism. Because of the uncertainties posed by any project that includes the release of genetically engineered organisms in the field given the lack of regulations that govern such activity, genetically engineered organisms are not likely to be used for bioremediation in the open marine environment for the foreseeable future.
Tissue and cell culture
Marine plant tissue and cell culture R&D presents a bit of a quandary. On the one hand, in many developing countries capabilities exist that would allow their researchers to commence relatively quickly and easily projects to improve marine plants through tissue and cell culture. This situation stems from researchers having employed terrestrial plant tissue culture in these countries for a decade or more, resulting in a significant reservoir of knowledge and knowhow having been built up. Further, some of the techniques developed for use in terrestrial plant biotechnology may be use in algal R&D. These techniques have been extensively described elsewhere (UNDP 1989; NRC 1990). However, the important point about plant biotechnology, and its possible adaption for marine plant R&D, is that the levels of difficulty inherent to applying them vary greatly. This means that most laboratories will be able to enter into algae research for species improvement, be it at the low capability
level of mutant selection and breeding; at the medium level of cell culture manipulation; or at the highest level of difficulty, which is plant genetic engineering. At whatever level a laboratory does its work, its impact is likely to be large since algal biotechnology is in its infancy, leaving much room for adding knowledge to algal biology and genetics and for developing applications for aquaculture and industry. Since retraining a terrestrial plant tissue or cell culturist for R&D focussed on marine plants could be done in three to six months, research projects in this area could soon be under way.
On the other hand, although algae are plants, there are important differences between terrestrial plants and algae. The molecular genetics of some plants, especially tobacco, has been intensively studied in cell and tissue culture for over ten years. To illustrate, one of the main difficulties in tissue culture work was to regenerate a whole plant from the callus. Intense study of the broad-leaved plants (dicotyledons), which include the tobacco plant, led to early success; scientists developed techniques that allow them to regenerate most dicotyledons. However, most important crop plants are monocotyledons, and these plants were, and remain, very difficult to regenerate. Nevertheless, respectable progress has been achieved in the last two years including, for example, the regeneration of rice. But the situation that today faces researchers investigating macroalgae is more complex and therefore more difficult. Unlike terrestrial plants, macroalgae do not form seeds but
instead rely on fragile spores for propagation. Also, their life cycles are more intricate in that they may alternate between sexual and asexual forms (Singleton and Kramer 1991). For these reasons there is much less fundamental knowledge about tissue and cell culture of macroalgae than about many terrestrial plants.
Even more remarkable are the achievements of plant biotechnology. Vectors have been developed for inserting foreign genes into their genomes. Several plant species have been transformed by inserting functional foreign genes into their genomes. For example, scientists have been able to genetically engineer a plant to resist pests by placing a gene coding for insect toxin in the plant's genome. Conversely, the molecular genetics of algae is new and no vectors have been developed for reliably transferring genes to algae (Chapman and Gellenbeck 1989).
An immense amount of basic research has been done on terrestrial plants, which has laid a basis for developments leading to applications. To a great extent, this situation reflects the amount of effort that has been devoted to terrestrial plant R&D, which is about 100 to 200 times that given to marine plants. It is no wonder, therefore, that research on marine plants is as much as twenty years behind terrestrial plants. Of course, some knowledge from terrestrial plant basic research is transferrable to marine plant research. Nevertheless, much basic research needs to be done on marine plants to clarify their growth characteristics; explain the molecular and genetic basis for regeneration; develop vectors to introduce foreign genes effectively into marine plants; and so forth. After researchers accomplish these goals, they will be able to develop tissue and cell culture techniques that reliably will make products of interest to farmers and industrialists. Due to limited
knowledge about marine plants, R&D that utilizes tissue and cell culture is likely to lead to applications, such as improved plant characteristics, in the medium to long term.
The situation is, however, different for microalgae, such as Dunaliella, Porphyridium, and Spirulina. Because these organisms have simpler structures than macroalgae, they are easier to investigate. Consequently, we know more about their biochemistry, genetics and physiology. In addition, while farming these organisms to produce beta carotene, glycerol and health foods, culturists and industrialists have gained a vast amount of empirical knowledge about the large-scale propagation and processing of microalgae. Scientists in developing countries could adapt or develop microalgae techniques for local production of these substances in the short term. In the medium term, research units should be able to recover microalgae from indigenous sites, screen them for promising substances, and do the applied research that would lead to the largescale propagation of promising new strains in cell culture.
Biosensors
As biosensor techniques are integral to the performance of advanced research in biotechnology, many research teams in developing countries are able to construct monoclonal/polyclonal antibodies and manufacture DNA probes. In the laboratory researchers employ them to detect and identify peptides, sequences of DNA, and other molecules of interest.
When one moves from the laboratory setting to the field, things become more difficult.. Field detection activities are likely to be done by persons of varying ability and training; highly variable physical forces act on reagents and operators; and confounding factors may cause false positives or, conversely, conceal true positives. The ability to detect and track a sought-after chemical or organism in the field is largely dependent on operators having sensors/detectors that give accurate, reproducible results, are simple to use, have long shelf lives, and are minimally effected by changes in light, temperature, humidity. The biosensor, whether a monoclonal/polyclonal antibody, DNA probe or another material, by itself is insufficient. Instead a detection kit is required, consisting of the biosensor, utensils to hold the sample, reagents to allow the detector and sample to react, reaction vessels or tubes, a read-out device, and positive and negative controls. All reagents and
implements must be packaged correctly and adequately protected from rough handling and harsh meteorological conditions.
Thus, R&D to develop the detection kit has two major steps. The first, which is to construct or manufacture the biosensor (the monoclonal/polyclonal antibody or DNA probe), can be done in several developing countries; research teams in other countries could gain the requisite capabilities in short order. Consequently, several nations are able to undertake the R&D that will lead to the realization in the short term of biosensors for detecting pathogens or chemicals in marine environs. However, these biosensors would function efficaciously only when operated by skilled researchers in the laboratory.
Leaving aside here the major problem of raising capital, very few developing countries, if any, have the science-based industry necessary for designing, packaging and rnarketing detection kits based on monoclonal/ polyclonal antibodies or DNA probes (see the next chapter). For these reasons, even though some researchers are capable of developing biosensors, we know of no facility in a developing country that possesses the advanced technology required to produce detector kits.
The development of chemoreceptor and immunological biosensors is in its infancy. Some systems work well in the laboratory performing specialized tasks. But extending their use past the laboratory stage requires further complicated, lengthy and expensive development. As a result, biosensor development is a risky business venture; one that will not attract many investors. To sum up, it is unlikely that chemical or immunological biosensor will available for general use in the short or medium term.
Biological oceanography including public health
One consequence of the public's concern about environmental degradation is that research in this field has increased tremendously. Microbial ecology is one of the research areas that have benefitted from this trend, expanding at an exponential rate in industrialized countries. However, microbial ecology is a new discipline, one that is just beginning to generate information about interactions between humans, microbes and the environment. Given its basic research orientation, it is not clear whether microbial ecology will experience the same rapid and expansive growth in developing countries as it has in the industrialized world. In some cases, governments in developing countries will indeed recognize the importance of this scientific discipline and will promote its growth in word and in deed. Even under such favorable conditions, it probably would take about two years before national researchers would receive the training to implement work programs in this area. The research
projects undertaken by these newly trained researchers would probably not generate applicable results until the long term. However, in the meantime scientists from developing countries trained in biological oceanography would be well placed to help their governments make significant contributions to international meetings, conferences and other fore where global issues having high scientific content are considered and international relief measures are designed and put into practice. The importance of this point, which is further elaborated in the next chapter, should not be underestimated.
In regions and countries where biological oceanography and microbial ecology are not bestowed high priority, important natural phenomena affecting human health and the environment will remain largely obscure for the foreseeable future.
Marine biotechnology applications in terrestrial agriculture
Certain characteristics exhibited by marine organisms may be utilized on land. We have seen, for example, how the flounder antifreeze protein seems to protect tomatoes from freezing. This property, which is coded for by a single gene, may be successfully transferred with today's technology, although its practicality still has to be proven. Other conceptually attractive projects involving the transfer of genes coding for useful properties in marine plants to terrestrial plants can be visualized. For example, marine plants have evolved exquisite mechanisms to protect themselves from salt, so in theory it would make sense to screen plants species possessing protective mechanisms against salt and assess whether they could be transferred to terrestrial plants. While attractive in concept, for the present this type of project is today beyond our scientific/technical capabilities because it would involve the interactions between many genes. Similar to the discussion above on
options in cell and tissue culture, much basic research needs to be done on marine plants before it will be possible to apply their important traits or characteristics on land. In particular, science needs to clarify the genetic control over metabolism in marine plants, including the production of secondary metabolites and tolerance to stresses, including salt stress. Thus, applications cannot be expected in this area in the short or medium term.
<section>Chapter 5</section>
<section>Building capability in marine biotechnology</section>
A country's scientific establishment must have a capability in biotechnology generally before it can enter more specialized fields, such as marine biotechnology. While recognizing that a small number of developing countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Cuba, India and Thailand, are performing complex research in some areas of biotechnology, most have much more limited capability. Therefore, a nation wishing to build capability in biotechnology must: (1) enhance present R&D capabilities or develop new capabilities in the biological sciences; (2) set up mechanisms for effectively transferring research findings to the agricultural, industrial or health sectors; (3) encourage indigenous, existing industry to develop the capacity for applying research; and (4) promote new biotechnology-based industry. Successful interlinking of these four sets of activities can be achieved only if the home government gives high priority to capability building, then takes the lead
by formulating appropriate policies, committing the necessary resources over the long term to implement them and, if progress stalls, encouraging scientists and scientific administrators to continue their efforts by bestowing appropriate rewards.
<section>Building R&D capability</section>
The process whereby a concept (or idea) is transformed into a finished product has been called the concept development process (Zilinskas 1989). Capability building encompasses all the stages of the concept development process, beginning with basic research and ending with the manufacture of products. Research may be done to advance knowledge and to develop new products and processes. Research that emphasizes the first may be termed basic research; it is usually characterized as being performed without having specific applications in mind and most often is done at institutions of higher learning. Goal-oriented research is termed applied research; it is typically performed in national laboratories, industry-based laboratories and, more rarely, at universities. Its purpose is to find out if something that works in the laboratory will also work on a larger scale. If it does, the concept is further developed in a pilot plant, then in full-scale industrial processes.
The general requirements for capabilitybuilding in biotechnology research have been set forth in two reports (McConnell and others 1986; NRC 1990); the more specific requirements for marine biotechnology research are discussed in two UNIDO publications (Colwell 1986; Singleton and Kramer 1991). An underlying assumption of capability building in biotechnology is that the standards by which excellence in education and scientific endeavors are measured and judged do not change from one place to another. Circumstance fluctuate, priorities may differ, methods for reaching objectives vary, but the fundamental criteria of excellence in research and development do not change. Therefore, the same factors apply in capability building, whether it occurs in an industrial or a developing country (McConnell and others 1986). This being so, capability building in R&D anywhere depends, in the first instance, on well-educated, well-trained scientific personnel.
The schooling of scientists is long and demanding. Experience shows that it takes approximately twenty-five years (from primary school through post-doctoral studies) to educate and train a biotechnology researcher, able to perform independent, advanced research. A sound basis has to be laid in secondary school and undergraduate studies in mathematics, expository writing, reading, and the natural sciences or engineering. In view of the interdisciplinary character of biotechnology, students need a broad background in the natural and physical sciences, as well as mathematics. Thus study should include general biology, cell biology, biochemistry, microbiology and genetics; the future marine biotechnologist would find certain electives useful, including aquaculture science, botany, phycology and zoology. The chemistry curriculum should include general chemistry, quantitative analysis, organic chemistry, and physical chemistry. Mathematics should include statistics, calculus and
differential equations. Chemical engineering courses are essential for the engineering students; knowledge in the computer sciences is essential for all students. In graduate training students plan and execute an independent research project to develop the ability to think through problems and design experiments to solve them. Frequent interactions with other students and critical readings of the relevant scientific literature are necessary to gain advanced knowledge and to develop sound judgement. Scientists should do post-doctoral work in a laboratory different from her or his home institution to gain new skills and perspectives. Similarly, engineers should obtain practical experience at up-to-date pharmaceutical, chemical, or genetic engineering companies.
Once scientists have completed their training, the employment conditions under which they work are of paramount importance. The reward system for scientists is quite complex. Essentially, those who study long and hard to become scientists rightfully expect to use their talents fully, to advance intellectually, and to be paid a fair wage. In particular, scientists form developing countries who receive advanced training must be able to utilize these skills in order to encourage them to stay and use their ability in their own countries.
The physical elements for good working conditions include:
· Adequate facilities housing laboratories and associated structures, including aquaria.
· Equipment of sufficient quality and quantity to do the research scientists have been trained to perform.
· The ready availability of common and rare chemicals needed to carry out experiments.
· A dependable infrastructure for sustained electric power, high quality water, and gas.
· Well equipped and maintained equipment repair and maintenance shops.
· Libraries containing a certain minimum number of current books and journals.
· Computer-facilitated access to international databases and computer mail (E-mail).
In addition, there are less precise, but equally important factors:
· Salaries for scientists and technicians commensurate with their training and abilities.
· Possibilities for professional advancement based on ability and quality of work.
· Availability of sufficient time and funds so that the scientist can communicate electronically with colleagues in the international scientific community and meet with them while amending international meetings and workshops.
· Relief from unnecessary administrative or bureaucratic procedures burdens.
· An equitable peer review system to review a scientist's project proposals, ongoing work, promotion and tenure.
· Possibility for an individual scientist to be part of a "critical mass. (see below).
· Support by well-trained, highly motivated technical and secretarial support staff.
· An equitable teaching load; that is, one that allows sufficient time for research.
· Individual incentives, such as small grants.
A significant research effort in biotechnology is best undertaken by an interdisciplinary team, consisting of a sufficient number of scientists and engineers to form a critical mass:
The principle behind the idea of "critical mass" is that five biotechnologists working in the same place are more effective and productive than the same five biotechnologists working in five different places. This is related to the benefit derived from frequent interaction and help among biotechnologists, which is much easier and more effective when they are working in the same place....In order to use different concepts or techniques to solve a certain problem, it is essential that a team consist of biotechnologists from a range of disciplines. For example, a successful team of workers in biotechnology must have at its disposal several independent scientists in each of the following basic disciplines: biochemistry, microbiology, immunology, cell biology, and biochemical engineering. Depending on the type of project, a team may also need one or several experts in specialized fields such as genetics, virology, pharmacology, plant science, animal science, or food science (Wu
There are three main considerations when attempting to calculate the optimal size of a research team:
o The number of projects the team is expected to take on. If one or two larger projects are being taken up, a critical mass for research in, for example, agricultural biotechnology can be achieved with five Ph.D.-level scientists from two or three different disciplines. A team undertaking research in medical biotechnology would consist of five to ten specialists in biochemistry, cell culture, genetics, monoclonal/polyclonal antibody construction, microbiology, and molecular biology. Depending on personal preferences, each scientist should be supported by three or four assistants, technicians and/or graduate students.
o Whether the team is expected to carry out basic research besides applied research. Scientists at university laboratories may, for instance, be expected to perform basic research, or research aimed at solving fundamental problems or adding to the store of fundamental knowledge. Sometimes basic research is needed to solve problems that arise when carrying out applied research or in development. Nevertheless, for whatever reason it is done, it will take time and effort, which must be considered when determining the size and composition of the research team.
o Whether the team will have a training function. Obviously, if a scientist has teaching and training duties, less time will be available for research. The more inexperienced the student, the greater the effort the scientist needs to devote to teaching. However, if the training period is long, say two years, then the trainee can be expected to contribute and be a net asset after about one year. As a rule of thumb a scientist helped by four to five technicians could take on one or two long-term trainees without seriously handicapping research.
Equipment and material requirements for a well-furbished laboratory have been described elsewhere (BOSTID 1982; Limonta 1989), so there is no need for a detailed discussion of them here (a summary is provided in Appendix B).
<section>Applying research</section>
Somewhere along the concept development process, the concept is transferred from the research laboratory to the development and testing facility. This step is vital, but due to systemic barriers that prevent technology transfer from university to industry, it takes place but rarely in developing countries (Zilinskas 1989). Each side, university and industry, must initiative certain actions that overcome barriers; somewhat like two crews constructing a tunnel, working from opposite sides of a mountain, but each doing what it must to reach the other.
The major indigenous technology producers in the developing countries are universities and public scientific or technical institutes. It is imperative that they take the initiative to make certain that the research results they engender, and the inventions their scientists conceive, reach those who can apply them. The best way to do so is for them to establish technology transfer units (Zilinskas 1992). Often, this will mean that universities will have to break out of the mold set perhaps hundreds of years ago, that of the academic ivory tower. Universities are changing everywhere, even the ancient universities of Europe that once epitomized the academic ivory tower. One reason for this change is that the scientific research done at these universities can no longer be designated as basic (as contrasted to applied research done usually by industry). In biotechnology especially, findings from so-called basic research can have almost immediate applied implications. For example,
when a researcher clarifies the molecular control in a cell that produces a protein, he or she is at the same time mapping out a production process that is of interest to industry. Unless the researcher, and the university employing that researcher, is willing to forego a possibly significant financial reward, the university must track the research being done at its laboratories, assess its applied impacts and aggressively present information about potentially marlcetable products to those who may wish to develop them.
From the industry side, the many companies that could conceivably benefit from introducing new or improved biotechnology techniques into their processes should make it a high priority to set up advanced developmental laboratories. These counterparts to the university technology transfer unit would have four responsibilities: to seek out research being performed in public laboratories that could be applied by the firm who they work for; to negotiate with the public laboratory for rights to use these results; to perform the advanced development that would enable the firm to utilize research results effectively; and to contract with the public laboratory for further research required to solve problems or improve processes (Zilinskas 1992).
<section>Industry and biotechnology</section>
It must be made clear that research accomplishments will remain tantalizing promises unless someone, or some entity, accesses its results and develops them. Results from biotechnology research can theoretically benefit technology end users in established, traditional firms and new biotechnology-based industries. The first type of firms exist throughout the world, manufacturing food and chemicals or extracting natural resource. However, by far most firms in developing countries have capabilities only to manufacture, package and market goods. They do not possess have applied research or advanced development units, which limits their ability to absorb or adopt results from indigenous or foreign scientific research. They must therefore act to set up advanced development laboratories, as discussed in the previous paragraph.
The second type of enterprise, the biotechnology-based company, is common in the industrial countries, but only a few of them have been established in developing countries. For example, in Peru there has been only one biotechnology company, Bioingenierfa Aplicada. This was also the first company in Peru to set up a direct link between industry and university; and for a time Bioingeniería Aplicada was able to exploit for profit the indigenous natural resources of that country on a sustainable and environmentally sound basis, but the company went out of business in early 1992.
It is important to encourage the establishment of biotechnology companies in the developing countries because they will probably be the main users of research results from indigenous universities and the most important vehicle for the development and commercialization of biotechnology products in their countries. However, as is the case of technology transfer units in industry, governments have the major role in creating the climate conducive to the entrepreneurship of biotechnology-based industry because only they can adopt measures that encourage people to make the risky investments required to establish that industry.
<section>The role of government in building capability in biotechnology</section>
An analysis of the factors affecting the development of biotechnology showed that the three most important are government funding of basic and applied research, scientific personnel availability and the level of their training, and the availability of financing and tax incentives for biotechnology business. Next in importance was the existence and adequacy of health, safety and environmental regulations, the operation of an equitable intellectual property law, and effective university-industry relations (OTA 1984). The most cursory analysis of these factors demonstrates the vital role of government, to make certain that economic, legal and political conditions favoring capability building are present in the country where it is being done.
Beginning with the first step in the concept development process, research at universities and institutes in developing countries is supported almost entirely by governments and researchers are mostly government employees. As is well known, public universities in most developing countries are underfunded and researchers are underpaid (when compared to persons in the private sector who have approximately the same education and responsibilities). In a time of severe budgetary constraints it is difficult to correct these shortcomings; nevertheless, it must be done before a country can build the scientific/technical base upon which a sciencebased industry, such as biotechnology industry, can grow and flourish. Accordingly, a significant strengthening of research can only come about if governments take the hard decisions to raise new funds or divert scarce funds from other programs in order to strengthen scientific institutions and finance necessary research.
Supporting research and researchers is, however, only the first of several activities a government must support before a concept is transformed into a product. After the scientistinventor has conceived a concept, the concept has been researched, and it has been verified as commercially promising in the laboratory, a point is reached where funds for the advanced development or the concept is required. This point is crucial because development will cost on the order of seven to ten times as much as research. However, developmental funds are exceedingly difficult to raise since investors will perceive a venture at this early stage of development as being a risky investment. A government is probably the only source in most developing countries for this kind of funding; if it is not available, the budding venture dies. Accordingly, governments must make funds available to industry, either as grants or lowcost, long-term loans, so it can set up advanced development laboratories
and pilot plant operations.
Tax laws may be designed to encourage investments in R&D, which is very important to science-based businesses. Governments may do this through three methods. First, laws may be designed to promote investments in R&D by allowing the company that invests its profits in R&D to credit a proportion of this amount against owed taxes. Second, investors who invest in risky R&D should be able to credit losses occurred in doing so against owed taxes. Third, tax laws should be designed so they do not unduly tax profits from profitable investments, thus appearing to penalize success.
There has been much debate on the propriety of patenting life forms and the fairness of allowing patents on procedures having wide applicability, such as the PCR (Kornberg 1991). This is not the place to debate these issues, it is however appropriate to note that investors are not likely to invest capital to develop inventions unless they are assured of exclusive, long-term rights to those inventions. Further, companies, whether multinational or national, are unlikely to develop new or unique products in countries where they cannot protect these products adequately through licensing or patenting. Accordingly, governrnents cannot ignore the intellectual property issues as they concern biotechnology inventions. If governments wish to set up biotechnology-based industries, they will find it well worth their while to consult with the World Intellectual Property Organization in Geneva on this matter, and to analyze the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the
Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure in terms of its own national interests.
Usually research is not effected by lack of regulations since universities are often autonomous in developing countries, enabling them to adopt their own rules governing R&D. In addition, they can easily adopt rules promulgated elsewhere such as, for example, the NIH guidelines or the generic regulations formulated by OECD (for a general discussion of the subject of biosafety and developing countries, see Trigo and Jaffé 1990). However, the biosafety issue is problematic when we move past research. Most developing countries have not promulgated regulations that specifically address biotechnology research, development, testing or manufacture. In some cases, laws or regulations that deal with the environment, occupational health or industrial activity may have implications for bioscientific or big-industrial activities, but national agencies will not or do not enforce them because they lack the expertise or resources to do so. In view of this uncertain situation in most
developing countries, companies will be unable to adequately plan for the development, testing and manufacture of biotechnology products. If they are unable to perform these vital activities, they will in effect be precluded from entering into biotechnology R&D in most developing countries. Accordingly, governments must adopt equitable and adequate biosafety regulations that govern research, development, testing and manufacture. This will have the effect of creating the stable regulatory climate necessary for industry to do long-term strategic planning.
<section>Discussion</section>
While keeping in mind the concept of the development process, and its starting point in research, this report emphasizes the applications of marine biotechnology. For one, the term "biotechnology" implies application. Further, application is the goal of most assistance provided by the World Bank to developing countries. However, this should in no way be interpreted to mean that basic research is unimportant to, or an unnecessary luxury for, developing countries. There are three major reasons why this is so. First, the basic research typically performed at teaching institutions provide a training in fundamental techniques to the scientific/technical personnel who will, in turn, teach and train students at secondary schools and universities, staff biotechnology industry and firms that utilizes biotechnology techniques, and give expert advice to governments. Second, in the course of developing a concept, especially at the pilot plant and manufacturing stages, problems often
arise whose solution requires basic research. Third, basic research is a type of "safety valve" to imaginative scientists, providing them with the mode for expressing their creativity that at times engenders unexpected results important to the applied sectors. Clearly, any country that wishes to have an in-depth, encompassing bioscience and biotechnology infrastructure requires a strong basic research component in the biological and biochemical sciences (McConnell and others 1986).
Nevertheless, as shown by the historic example of development in Japan and, more recently, by Hong Kong, Singapore and the Republic of Korea, a country that emphasizes applied R&D and, concurrently, constructively imports and adapts foreign technology is likely to benefit through accelerated economic development. Perhaps similar measures can be taken by countries rich in marine resources, who have the option of capitalizing on these resources by investing in marine biotechnology. The main ingredients to enter this field are often present or are readily attainable: biotechnology is relatively accessible to the scientific community since its techniques have been published or may be accessed in data banks; the universities of most countries have ongoing teaching and research programs in biology, biochemistry, marine biology and the ocean sciences, which provides a scientific basis for biotechnology; and a technical basis exists as well in many countries in the form of
established aquaculture, fisheries and natural products development. If these ingredients are present, it is possible that a country can benefit in the short term by its government promoting contacts between the marine natural science researchers and the field workers in aquaculture, fisheries and other industries.
Besides the factors that directly affect the development of options for developing countries in marine biotechnology, an indirect factor bears mentioning. A useful side-effect that accrues to developing countries that have attained significant capabilities in marine biotechnology is that their level of expertise in marine and oceanographic biology will simultaneously increase markedly. In particular, as capability building encompasses training, more scientists in developing countries become trained in biological oceanography and marine biodiversity; individuals who thereafter will be well-placed to perform the investigations and technological assessments that will form the basis for the formulation of national policies and regulations to protect and manage indigenous marine resources. Further, these experts would be well equipped to serve as consultants to national delegations at international meetings and conferences whose aim will be to deal with the consequences of human
activities that interfere with, modify or disturb natural processes. In particular, since the oceans are the final depository for many pollutants and serve as the world's major carbon sink (Initiative 1990), input from scientists knowledgeable about marine natural sciences will be required when politicians formulate international measures to mitigate the negative effects stemming from the "greenhouse" effect, the destruction of ozone in the stratosphere, the increasing levels of toxic agrochemicals in ground water and oceans, and other problems that know no national boundaries. As a result of them having the requisite expertise in the marine biosciences, developing countries will be able to contribute substantially to the crafting of international measures that seek to alleviate present global problems and prevent future ones.
<section>Chapter 6</section>
<section>The experience of major international agencies in marine biotechnology and related areas</section>
Major international organizations and some nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) were contacted and requested to provide information about their activities in marine biotechnology and marine biotechnology-related areas. Some agencies provided much information about their work, others did not respond or gave only sketchy information. So the amount of space allocated to agencies in the following sections do not necessarily relate to the size or extent of their programs in marine biotechnology-related areas.
We stress that most of the information we present below was provided by the agencies themselves; in some cases we were able to supplement it through interviews with agency professionals administering pertinent projects. From the responses we received it is clear that with the exception of UNIDO, no organization has experience in marine biotechnology per se, but several are supporting or are involved in marine biotechnology-related areas. In this chapter we describe these activities and attempt as possible to orient them within the agencies' overall work program.
The agencies are dealt with in alphabetical order. Each agency is covered in a section that has two parts. The first describes the agency's activities in marine biotechnology-related areas. The second part contains our thoughts on possible ways that the agency can incorporate marine biotechnology in its work program. We end this chapter with a brief discussion on the reasons why professionals of agencies are mostly uninformed about marine biotechnology.
<section>Food and agricultural organization</section>
The major goal of the FAO is to increase the world's food supply. In line with this mission, the FAO has since its inception provided major funding to developing countries for investments in fisheries equipment and for strengthening their management capabilities. Significant FAO funding has also been directed at expanding aquaculture in developing countries. In all, the FAO sponsored 114 aquaculture projects during 1972-1984 at a cost of approximately $51 million (FAO 1991). All were aimed at the production of food; few included research. Of the thirty projects that did include a research component, nine used laboratory facilities, but only one consisted solely of research. In general, research is done to improve aquaculture systems, to identify new species/aquaculture system combinations, and to identify indigenous species that may be suitable for aquaculture.
FAO is aware that many fisheries have reached their maximum sustainable yield, and that some are beyond that stage. Beginning in 1989, the FAO's Fisheries Department has therefore greatly expanded its efforts in aquaculture. In particular, it is taking a critical look at the future of aquaculture development, including culture methods and siting problems (FAO 1989). In this vein, it is sponsoring the Seafarming Development and Demonstration Project of NACA in Thailand, which aims to overcome problems that beset aquaculture, including seed supply, culture techniques, post-harvest processing and the training of aquaculturists (Lovatelli 1990). Among its regional initiatives, it has set up the UNDP/FAO Regional Seafarming Development Project, which sponsored the first Asia-Pacific Regional Workshop on the Culture and Utilization of Seaweed, held in Cebu, Philippines during August 1990.
The FAO indicated that it is not sponsoring any marine biotechnology projects. It has, however, been sponsoring some research in related areas, such as marine biology and aquaculture, and is currently developing its understanding of population genetics and biodiversity of wild and cultured species. If these approaches were to be further developed, it could open the way for a FAO program that would include marine biotechnology. In addition, as is made clear above, marine biotechnology may be used to significantly increase yields from aquaculture through the genetic improvement of culture organisms and by improving health among cultured species. These possibilities relate directly to FAO's mission of improving food supplies and might therefore be taken up by the agency. But as the situation now stands, it is unclear whether FAO will undertake significant initiatives in marine biotechnology in the near term. (FAO's involvement in biosafety is discussed below in the UNIDO
section.)
<section>Inter-American development bank and other development banks</section>
The IDB has done extensive lending in the field of fisheries. Many of these loans are directed to private fishing fleets and fish processing plants. While there are a few aquaculture and research oriented activities funded by IDB, the overall picture is one of limited funding in sectors related to marine biotechnology. The IDB would probably be interested in providing loans for activities that would improve current aquaculture practices or set up marine natural product development (Peacock 1991).
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has been investing in aquaculture and fisheries in countries like Bangladesh, Burma, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Thailand. The GIFT project at ICLARM is an example of such projects (see discussion in the section on ICLARM, page 82). In view of biotechnology's long history in the South East Asian countries, projects amalgamating aquaculture and biotechnology seems feasible. If such projects were developed, the ADB would probably be interested in providing loans to fund them.
The European Investment Bank (EIB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the Andean (CorporaciónDevelopment Corporation (Corporación Andina de Fomento), and the African Development Bank (AFDB) are, or have been, involved in aquaculture projects. In addition, they are increasing their support for biotechnology projects. These regional banks would probably assess proposals for marine biotechnology projects like any other project; that is, in terms of their likely return on investment.
<section>Intergovernmental oceanographic commission</section>
The IOC, established in 1960, is a functionally autonomous (semi-independent) agency, which means it has its own membership, statutes and governing body, even though its secretariat is sited at the headquarters of the U.N. Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in Paris. The IOC promotes marine scientific investigations and systematic ocean observations through concerted actions in partnership with its member states and other international organizations. The specific activities the IOC is involved with include supporting the global sealevel observing system (GLOSS); the joint IOCWorld Meteorological Organization program called Integrated Global Ocean System (IGOSS); ocean science research on living resources in cooperation with FAO; research on nonliving resources with various U.N. organizations; marine pollution investigations and monitoring in cooperation with UNEP and the International Atomic Energy Agency through the Global Investigation of Pollution in
the Marine Environment program; and the global mussel watch (see page 4). An important new initiative is the development of the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS), which aims to collect data on climatic variability and change to be used to construct prediction models. Training, education, mutual assistance and partnerships are important elements in all IOC activities. The long-term goal is to develop IOC programs that will permit management of oceans similarly to how we today manage agricultural systems.
IOC activities to date do not bear on marine biotechnology, but the development of biological detection systems might use advanced marine biotechnological methods. For example, IOC's marine pollution research program includes studies on the biological effects of pollution and the development of observation and statistical methods that may be used to monitor changes; this program would benefit from the employment of biosensors. There is also a strong desire at IOC to coordinate several oceanographic activities to enhance our understanding of living and nonliving marine systems. Since marine biotechnology opens added opportunities to further understand marine environments, there exist possibilities for cooperating on a variety of marine research related activities (Kullenberg 1991).
<section>International centre for genetic engineering and biotechnology</section>
Beginning in 1981, UNIDO was instrumental in establishing the ICGEB, which is now operational in two components, located in New Delhi, India and Trieste, Italy, and including as an integral part a network of affiliated centers in countries around the world (Taylhardat 1989a and 1989b). The ICGEB's governing body is its Preparatory Committee, made up of representatives from the forty-five countries that have signed the Statutes. A Panel of Scientific Advisers, consisting of thirteen eminent scientists, assists and advises the Committee and the ICGEB Director, Dr. A. Falaschi. Fifteen research centers have been designated as ICGEB affiliated centers: in Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Cuba, Egypt, Greece, Hungary, Mexico, Nigeria, Tunisia, Venezuela and Yugoslavia. Applications from Iran and Turkey are pending. Since more than twentyfour countries have ratified the ICGEB's statutes, the Centre is poised to becomes a freestanding intergovernmental
organization. This development is likely to occur in early 1993. Until that time, ICGEB is run by UNIDO as a project according to a rolling five-year program. At present, ICGEB is funded at $72 million for the period July 1992 through June 1997 (ICGEB 1990).
Of indirect interest to this report is ICGEB's involvement in biosafety. Specifically, a joint UNEP/ICGEB program on biosafety commenced in 1991. Its two initial activities consisted of courses offered in Trieste to researchers from developing countries: a threeday course was held July 1991 and attended by thirty scientists called "Genetically Modified Organisms: Safety in the Laboratory and the Environment" and a subsequent three-day course with fifty participants called "Genetically Modified Organisms for the 1990's" followed.
While the ICGEB is not presently undertaking projects in marine biotechnology, it has offered courses to scientists of member countries related to the field, including one presented December 16-20, 1991 called "Marine Microbiology and Biochemistry".
Given its five year program cycle, in the short to medium term the ICGEB is not likely to become deeply involved in marine biotechnology. It probably will continue offering courses on techniques and processes that relate to marine biotechnology, thereby helping countries whose scientists attend to build capabilities relevant to the field. In addition, as scientists in developing countries learn the techniques of risk assessment and risk management at the ICGEB, they will be able to assist their governments in formulating a regulatory regime that allows a biotechnologybased industry to operate. As we noted above, adequate regulations is very important for the concept development process to function in a country.
<section>International maritime organization</section>
The IMO, headquartered in London, focusses on shipping-related activities. We have no indication that IMO sponsors marine biotechnology or marine biotechnology-related projects.
In the course of our research we have found out that various agencies are preparing projects under the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) that bear on ports' reception facilities; some of these include bioremediation activities in developing countries. Apparently, IMO will be one of the agencies consulted for such work. Further, IMO has a good knowledge of the needs of waste disposal facilities and its relation to the shipping industry and is experienced with the problems created by oil spills. It would therefore seem that it would be in the agency's interest to consider the value of supporting three subareas of marine biotechnology: bioremediation of ship wastes, bioremediation of oil spills and biofouling. Once involved with enhancing bioremediation, IMO could support R&D that attempts to adapt bioremediation techniques for the treatment of various hazardous wastes and raw sewage that would otherwise be disposed of in the oceans. In addition, it might consider the
question of replacing paints used to prevent the biofouling of ships' hulls, but which generally are very toxic to marine life. If biological films that prevent the propagation of a variety of sea organisms would be developed, pollution of harbors and intensely trafficked waters could be reduced.
<section>United nations conference on the environment and development</section>
UNCED, also known as "Earth Submit", was held during June 3-13, 1992 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. UNCED's major objectives were to suggest steps that may be taken by governments and international organizations to alleviate the damage done to the environment by human activities and to prevent future damage, while allowing economic development to proceed relatively unhindered. UNCED's Agenda 21, which is an action agenda for the 21st century addressed to governments, IGOs and NGOs, includes the item "Environmentally Sound Management of Biotechnology".
UNCED's Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) was established in early 1990; it had three working groups. Working Group 1, chaired by Mr. Bo Kjellén from Sweden, addressed a variety of important issues, including the atmosphere, forests, land resources, desertification, biodiversity and biotechnology; Working Group 2, chaired by Dr. Bukar Shaib from Nigeria, addressed oceans, freshwater resources and the management and movement of all types of wastes; and Working Group 3, chaired by Mr. Bedrich Moldan from Czechoslovakia, addressed crosscutting issues, including legal and institutional issues, human settlements, technology transfer and Agenda 21.
Chapter 16 of Agenda 21 identifies five objectives for activities to promote biotechnology, especially in developing countries: increase the availability of food, feed and renewable raw materials; improve human health; enhance protection of the environment; enhance safety and develop international mechanisms for cooperation; and establish enabling mechanisms for the development and environmentally sound application of biotechnology (UNCED 1992). In addition, there should be an explicit link between biotechnology and biodiversity, covering the forest, soil, freshwater and marine sectors (UNCED 1991).
Marine biotechnology is not mentioned in any of the UNCED documents. Perhaps the publication of this report will stimulate a movement to include this field while carrying out the other Agenda 21 biotechnology objectives. In particular, marine biotechnology could help connect biodiversity and biotechnology. In the marine area, one of the best ways to do so is through biological oceanography (see pages 64 and following); that is, to use advanced biotechnology techniques to track the development and movements of marine organisms, especially microorganisms; to clarify dispersion mechanisms for organisms and genes; and to trace the evolutionary development of marine species. In addition, bioremediation techniques hold promise for cleaning up much of the degraded environment common to coastal developing countries and for preventing future pollution through appropriate treatment of wastes from land and water-based sources.
<section>United nations development programme</section>
UNDP, the major provider of technical assistance among U.N. agencies, has a long history of supporting aquaculture projects in developing countries, including China, Cuba, India, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Lao P.D.R., Madagascar, Nepal and Viet Nam. Some of these projects involving marine fish and shrimp species include R&D whose objective was to genetically improve stocks, for example, the GIFT project at ICLARM (see page 82). Similarly, a project (begun in 1990 and executed by FAO) to develop seaweed production methods in the Philippines has a research component for improving algal strains.
UNDP supports several projects in agriculture, health and industry that include biotechnology components. Conversely, the agency has so far not been involved in marine biotechnology. Nevertheless, the UNDP professionals that we have interviewed indicate an interest in marine biotechnology and would promote projects in this field that would enhance economic development in recipient countries. For example, UNDP is investigating irrigation schemes that utilize nutrient rich sea water to grow salt water resistant plants. This type of project could benefit from the application of marine biotechnology techniques.
<section>United nations educational, scientific and cultural organization</section>
UNESCO set up a program related to environmental and applied microbiology already in 1946; ten years later it established the Panel on Microbiology, which was charged with setting up an international network for the exchange and preservation of industrial microorganisms and to train microbiologists. In 1970 UNESCO acted to establish a network of Microbial Resource Centers (MIRCEN), which was indeed established in 1975 in cooperation with UNEP and the International Cell Research Organization. MIRCEN has since then expanded, it now includes twenty-three centers in nineteen countries. In addition to its original aims of maintaining cell culture collections, MIRCEN now promotes international cooperation in many aspects of applied microbiology and biotechnology, provides specialized training to developing country researchers on advanced techniques of biotechnology, and in general seeks to improve the quality of life in the developing countries through the applications of
biotechnology.
In addition to supporting MIRCEN, UNESCO fosters inter-agency cooperation through the organizing of periodic international conferences, called Global Impacts of Applied Microbiology (GIAM), that are held approximately every four years; the last one was in 1991 in Malta. GIAMs bring together scientists, as well as decision makers, from around the world to consider how applied microbiology/biotechnology may be directed for the benefit of developing countries and to improve the environment.
Starting in 1990, UNESCO set up the Biotechnology Action Council, which administers a research and training program in biotechnology related to terrestrial and aquatic plants. During 1992-93 the Council expects to award nineteen short-term fellowships, and in 1993 hopes to fund five professorships.
In the marine field, UNESCO cooperates in the work of the IOC to promote marine scientific investigations (see above), including the Coastal and Marine Program (COMAR); has established Man and the Biosphere Programme (MAB) to develop a basis for the rational use and conservation of terrestrial and marine resources; and is active in the International Hydrological Programme, which is developing a scientific basis for the management of water resources, including bioremediation of polluted waters.
While UNESCO has not been involved in marine biotechnology, without doubt, UNESCO could make an important contribution to capability building in marine biotechnology R&D since it is the lead agency in the UN system for helping countries improve their educational institutions and basic research institutes, and in view of its wide-ranging programs related to biotechnology generally. In addition, UNESCO is well placed to identify counterpart institutions that could cooperate in marine biotechnology research having international significance. It also could inform policy makers in coastal and island developing countries about the possibilities that marine biotechnology hold for them through UNESCO publications and UNESCO-supported conferences.
<section>United nations environment programme</section>
Some of UNEP's most significant activities are focussed on the marine environment, particularly its ten regional seas programs that cover Mediterranean, Kuwait region, Red Sea, Caribbean, the Atlantic coast of West and Central Africa, the East African seaboard, the Pacific coast of South America, the islands of the South Pacific, the East Asian region, and the South Asian Seas. These programs include activities such as the monitoring and control of marine pollution, as well as the coordination of pollution prevention strategies.
As is the case with other agencies, UNEP is not presently supporting marine biotechnology projects. The question then is what help marine biotechnology may offer the agency to fulfill its mission. One possibility of potential importance are biosensors. The joint IOC/UNEP Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution (GESAMP) has been exceedingly active in determining some of the problems of marine pollution; its work could be enhanced through advanced biotechnology detection techniques. Another possibility is for UNEP to investigate and clarify the possibility of using bioremediation to treat pollution in developing countries and to adapt bioremediation techniques for the treatment of waste water from land based sources. (UNEP's involvement with biosafety is discussed below in the UNIDO section.)
<section>United nations industrial development organization</section>
UNIDO's interest in marine biotechnology is of rather long duration, beginning in the early 1980s. The agency approaches this field from two directions - from its multifaceted biotechnology program and from its interest in setting up a marine sciences center.
UNIDO supports numerous projects in biotechnology that focus on applied R&D and on pharmaceutical and industrial applications. Developments throughout the world in biotechnology, including its marine aspects, are reported in the quarterly publication Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology Monitor, which is sent free on request to scientists in developing countries. However, UNIDO's interest in marine biotechnology became manifest when Dr. Rita R. Colwell was commissioned to write the report Marine Biotechnology and the Developing Countries (1986), which discusses the rich promises the field holds for developing countries and outlines an approach whereby they can build the requisite capabilities to fulfill these promises. Dr. Colwell's ideas were expanded on in 1989, when the report "Biotechnology of Marine Algae: Opportunities for Developing Countries was published (Singleton and Kramer 1991). A third report is now being written, on the specific uses that marine biotechnology has for the Mediterranean countries.
UNDO is also setting up a program on bioremediation and oil recovery. Primarily intended for countries belonging to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), it will offer short and long term training to scientists for improving strains of oil degrading microorganism and using them for oil spill cleanup or enhanced oil recovery.
Of relevance to marine biosafety is UNIDO's initiative to establish an interagency working group on biosafety. In 1985 UNIDO asked UNEP to form a joint working group to consider safety aspects of biotechnology research, bioindustry and field testing. The working group was set up in 1986 and has since then met five times. During the last two years WHO and FAO joined it. The principle driving the UNIDO/UNEP/WHO/FAO Working Group on Biosafety, as it is now called, is that the guidelines it develops should strike a balance between the need to protect workers, public and environment and the exigency of allowing biotechnology to develop effectively.
As the Working Group's work has progressed, and as it gains experience, its strategy has evolved. As mentioned above, there is broad agreement among countries where advanced biotechnology R&D is done on the level of control appropriate for research and large-scale contained use of genetically engineered organisms. Similarly, products produced by conventionally developed or genetically engineered microorganisms for contained use are accommodated under existing national regulations governing drugs, food or environment. However, no such international unanimity exists in regard to the testing in the field of genetically engineered animals, plants or microorganisms. Because of this predicament, two detrimental consequences have occurred. First, in one case when testing was done by a U.S. commercial firm in Argentina, a dispute arose about the adequacy of safety precautions of the test. The motives of the firm conducting the test were questioned, the implication being that testing
was being done where local regulations were weak or nonexistent. Without adequate biosafety regulations, some fear that unscrupulous companies may seek to field test organisms and products where there are few legal hindrances. Second, and more commonly, because regulatory agencies have been unclear on how to proceed, they have held up the field testing of potentially valuable products. In recognition of the uncertainties surrounding field testing, the Working Group has recommended that the agencies represented on it should undertake three activities:
o Formulate an International Code of Conduct for the Release of Organisms Into the Environment. UNIDO took the lead in drafting the Code. A working group of thirty-five experts met with the Working Group in June 1991 to formulate a draft code; the draft code was further improved on, then adopted in July 1991 (UNIDO 1991).
o Establish the International Information Resource for the Release of Organisms into the Environment. UNEP is the lead agency for establishing the Resource, which will collect and store all available information about deliberate release activities throughout the world. Its steering committee was set up in March 1991; its first responsibility is to take an inventory of existing information sources on release activities.
o Draft and publish a biosafety manual. A manual for principally the developing countries will be prepared jointly by UNIDO, UNEP, FAO and WHO for publication in 1992. It will contain a compilation of national and international biosafety rules and guidelines, which may be drawn upon when international attempts are made to harmonize biosafety regulations. It will also seek to clarify the safe conduct of biotechnology research and its applications.
Referring to the second direction, in the marine sciences, unlike other agencies discussed above, UNIDO focusses on industrial applications in the marine sector rather than the marine environment per se. UNIDO senior staff has since 1984 been laying a basis for establishing two marine sciences centers of excellence for developing countries, one in the Caribbean and the other in the Mediterranean. The first, tentatively named the International Ocean Institute may be set up as early as this year. As now planned, a component of the institute will be devoted to investigating the industrial potential of marine biotechnology for developing countries. As of this writing, support from major donor countries is being sought.
In 1991 UNIDO began to publish quarterly the Marine Industrial Technology Monitor, the fourth in a series of such publications (the others deal with advanced materials, biotechnology and microelectronics). Each issue has two parts. The first consists of an indepth treatment of a specific topic in marine industrial technology; the second contains capsule reviews of topical developments in the field (including marine biotechnology) and a listing of technical conferences and meetings. Free subscriptions to the monitor may be requested from UNIDO's Industrial Technology Development Division.
While UNIDO has not defined a work program for itself in marine biotechnology, it provides technical assistance for marine biotechnology-related projects and it has made certain that biotechnology components are included in the proposed marine sciences centers. In the first instance, R&D in the components might focus its R&D efforts on bioremediation, especially since the centers will be sited in regions heavily influenced by pollutants from ocean and land-based sources. UNIDO might also expand its natural resources program, to include projects aimed at the collecting and screening of marine organisms for bioactive substances and chemicals useful to industry and in agriculture.
<section>World bank</section>
The point can be made immediately; there is no World Bank experience in marine biotechnology. In effect, this report introduces the World Bank to marine biotechnology. Since this is the case, we have sought out projects supported by the World Bank in marine biotechnology-related areas, including fisheries, aquaculture and general biotechnology. Options for future World Bank activities in or related to marine biotechnology are set forth and discussed in the next chapter.
The World Bank sponsored the project "Study of International Fisheries Research" during 1989-90, which was published in 1991 (World Bank 1991b). In view of the importance of fisheries to many developing countries, this study was timely. To illustrate, out of the leading ten fishing nations in the world, six are developing countries (Chile, China, India, Indonesia, Peru and Thailand) and one, the Republic of Korea, is a newly industrial country (1989 FAO statistics 1992). One important objective of the study was to determine high priority research needs related to fisheries and aquaculture, assess the capacity of certain developing countries to perform fisheries and aquaculture research, and to formulate strategies for improving donor support for research. In the course of the Study seven technical papers were prepared dealing with fisheries and aquaculture R&D capabilities of many African, Asian and Latin American countries, the development of tropical aquaculture,
international cooperation in fisheries research, and research needs of smallscale fisheries. One finding of the study was that there is among surveyed countries a need for research aimed at the genetic improvement in cultured species to improve health, growth and feed requirements. As a result of the study, the World Bank staff has shown an increased interest in fisheries research; an activity that could easily include a marine biotechnology component.
In general, World Bank activities in the aquaculture sector has expanded greatly in the past decades. These activities might occur either as a sub-component of larger fisheries or agricultural projects, or as aquaculture projects with lines of credit. Alternatively, projects may be funded through multilateral investment banks and donor organizations, for example, in 1985 $14.1 million was provided in this way. In this case, there is a divisions of competence between the World Bank and some of the regional banks, that is, ADB and IDB, so that the latter institutions finance the bulk of the aquaculture projects. The World Bank had an early involvement with tidal ponds in Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Nigeria. There has been assistance for medium nutrient input systems in Bangladesh and Thailand for shrimp, and in China, India, Egypt and Yugoslavia for carp. More recently, the World Bank provided support for the stocking of reservoirs in Brazil, and in 1991 a Malawi
fisheries loan included components for aquaculture.
In terrestrial biotechnology, the major support provided by the World Bank is related to agriculture R&D performed at the sixteen International Agricultural Research Centers (IARCs) of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). Programs carried out by the CGIAR centers include research to increase productivity of agriculture and animal husbandry, management of natural resources and germplasm preservation. The World Bank provided about 15 percent ($32 million) of CGIAR's 1990 budget of $235 million.
CGIAR's research purview includes commodities that provide 75 percent of the food energy, including protein, for the world's population (World Bank 1992). So far, CGIAR research centers have been almost entirely focussed on terrestrial resources. Further, by far most research done at the CGIAR centers is applied, with the aim of producing useful results in as short time as possible. Traditional agricultural techniques are at the current stage of development the safest and most efficient systems for increasing the productivity of crops (as evidenced by the "Green Revolution.) and the quality and quantity of animal production. As a recent World Bank supported project has found, the biotechnology techniques more advanced than tissue culture have for this reason not been extensively adopted in CGIAR laboratories (World Bank 1991a). The more sophisticated genetic engineering methods employed by modern biotechnology are gradually being introduced at the CGIAR institutes, and will
probably be equally important within the medium- to long-term range (10-30 years) (Bialy 1992).
The terrestrial orientation of CGIAR changed when ICLARM in the Philippines became a member of the CGIAR network in 1992. It was established in 1977, largely through a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation. Currently, it is funded at about $4 million per year and is staffed by sixty scientists and support personnel. ICLARM's mission is to assist in the management and marketing of aquatic resources in developing countries. ICLARM has four basic programs aquaculture, coastal area management, captive fisheries management and information services. Its beneficiaries are mainly small-scale fisheries and traditional aquaculturists.
An example of the type of R&D projects done at ICLARM is the project on the genetic improvement of farmed tilapias (GIFT), which is being carried out in cooperation with the Institute of Aquaculture Research in Norway and is funded by the UNDP and ADB. The impetus of GIFT came from the progressive lowering of yields from existing tilapia aquaculture due to a deterioration of tilapia broodstock in the Philippines, caused in part by the introduction of a lower quality tilapia strain from Mozambique (but which grow well in brackish water). The primary objective of the project is thus to produce a tilapia strain that grows faster than present strains and has other favorable characteristics (Guerrero 1991).
Separate from its support of CGIAR, World Bank investments in the agricultural research sector for the period 1981-1987 was $575 million for twenty-one national projects. We cannot determine exactly how much of this money goes to biotechnology, but at least $93 million is provided for biotechnology R&D in ten different projects.
In 1989 the World Bank, in cooperation with the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research, the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau and the International Service for National Agricultural Research, sponsored a pioneering study on the opportunities that agricultural biotechnology presents for international development. The findings from that study were synthesized in a concise World Bank technical paper published in 1991 (World Bank 1991a). Findings from the study have implications that go beyond agriculture. In particular, the study, among other activities, analyzed the regulatory and intellectual property issues as they relate to biotechnology and developing countries. To sum up the recommendations, in regard to regulations, the report suggested that developing countries set up institutional biosafety committees in scientific research institutions and establish national review bodies and guidelines along the lines formulated by the OECD, to
monitor and regulate biotechnology research, testing and applications. In regard to intellectual property rights, the point is made that the lack of patent protection in most developing countries is a major disincentive for private sector investments in biotechnology, both by local private sector companies and by transnational corporations. Each country needs to weigh the benefits and costs of intellectual property rights in biotechnology, and frame its policies accordingly. The report suggests further that the international agricultural research centers could also patent their inventions, and then license (freely, if appropriate) these inventions for use by national agricultural research systems (NARS), and other collaborators.
Outside of agriculture research, some other projects have education, science and technology components that include biotechnology activities. Most of this funding has been directed to more technically advanced countries. In these cases, funding has been for infrastructure, laboratory facilities and equipment, and training. One recent example is the Support Program for Scientific and Technological Development (PADCT) in Brazil. The first part, PADCI. I, was completed during 1985-90 and was funded by a $72 million loan from the Bank and Brazilian funds of $107 million. PADCT II will be carried out during 1991-98 and will be funded at about $600 million, with funding to be provided equally by the Bank and Brazil. The objectives of this large project is to strengthen the management of Brazil's science and technology sector; strengthen Brazilian capabilities in specific science areas, including biotechnology; and to improve the milieu for technological innovation in industry. The
biotechnology component, funded at $74..2 million during PADCT I and $103.1 during PADCT II, aims to strengthen biotechnology for applications in human health, agriculture, animal husbandry and industry. While the major portion of these funds will support scientific research and technology development projects, a significant portion will be used for human resource development, mostly specialized training in-country and overseas.
Lessons from the PADCT project are expected to be applied to other large science and technology projects. First in line is a project that is being developed for Mexico to completely reorganize that country's main agency supporting science and scientific research, the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (CONACYT). The details of this program, called Program of Support for Mexican Science, is being worked out as this is written.
<section>Discussion</section>
While some agencies described and discussed in this chapter provide technical assistance in general biotechnology or in marine biotechnology-related areas (such as aquaculture and natural products development), no agency as yet supports projects in marine biotechnology. From the interviews we have had with agency personnel, there seems to be three major reasons for this situation. First, the professionals staffing agencies are mostly unfamiliar with biotechnology generally and are almost entirely unaware of marine biotechnology. Thus, even in cases where biotechnology could be constructively applied to solve problems or promote economic development, they are unable to present the biotechnology option to policy makers in developing countries. Second, policy makers in developing countries and their technical advisers, while often aware of biotechnology, are uninformed of marine biotechnology, so they are not in a position to request assistance in this field. The low level of
awareness of marine biotechnology stems from the third reason, namely marine biotechnology has received little publicity so far. Unlike general biotechnology, which has been widely and massively reported on throughout the world, information about marine biotechnology has not spread much beyond researchers in the field and a few industrialists seeking to apply research results, mainly related to natural marine products. Further, the question of what implications general biotechnology have for developing countries has been debated by scientists and decision makers in developing countries since 1981-82, when UNIDO initiated the project that was to become the ICGEB, and when the NAS published its extremely influential study on biotechnology for development (BOSTID 1982; UNIDO 1981). No such pivotal events relevant to marine biotechnology has yet taken place. Perhaps this report will serve as a starting point for the promotion of marine biotechnology in developing countries.
<section>Chapter 7</section>
<section>Exploring world bank options for investment in marine biotechnology</section>
In this chapter various options are explored for World Bank assistance to developing countries for sustainable development in marine biotechnology. Three approaches are suggested that are already being taken by the Bank in other contexts: science and technology lending; support of environmental objectives; and support for private sector development (PSD).
<section>Science and technology lending</section>
A former science adviser to the World Bank has clarified the four mechanisms whereby the Bank supports science and technology (Weiss 1985). Three of these mechanism has implications for capability building in marine biotechnology.
Technical assistance for technological development
Certain elements are common to Bank projects that aim to assist a country in its technological development. As a rule, Bank officials try to ensure that development projects are well suited for the borrowing country and that they fit existing local conditions. Many Bank projects include activities for transferring technology to the borrowing country. These elements are all relevant to the technological development of the marine sector in borrowing countries.
If a requesting country is one that is rich in marine resources, and it therefore could usefully apply marine biotechnology, this option could be brought to the attention of the borrowing country's officials. For example, if the Bank at some future time develops an aquaculture project, it could include a research component to, for example, prevent endemic diseases from damaging the cultured animals or plants. Research may be done to develop diagnostic methods for early detection of diseases, for vaccines to prevent the occurrence of diseases, or for therapeutic drugs to treat diseased organisms. The elements common to Bank projects would have implications for this component: it would take into account local conditions and would deal with a local problem, it would be an innovative approach to anticipating problems that if not met might negatively affect the project's outcome, and it would probably include the transfer of technology and its adaption to fit local circumstances.
Similar examples could be given for future projects involving waste water treatment, pollution control and alleviation, natural products development, and public health in the coastal zone.
Many opportunities exist for this kind of assistance; we will present one example here. The nation of Qatar now uses revenues from its one major natural resource, petroleum, to support its agriculture through expensive imports. In particular, Qatar imports soil nutrients to enrich its sandy soil, hay for feeding live stock, and fish feed for a small aquaculture industry (Seaweed 1991). However, an indigenous alternative could relatively easily be developed. The nation could invest in building land-based tanks or ponds for growing macroalgae. With proper R&D it would be possible to grow macroalgal strains that after processing could be plowed into the soil, adding the vital nutrients and body for growing crops. Further, part of the harvest may be diverted for use as fish feed in aquaculture. An investment into macroalgal R&D and aquaculture facilities under circumstances such as these would seem to make business sense.
Project lending for science and technology
Some loans are aimed at directly enhancing the scientific and technological capability of a country. The Brazilian Science Research and Training Project is an example of such a project; and it might become a model for how the Bank may assist biotechnology capability building in developing countries. A prospective example may be mentioned. If the World Bank study on fisheries research that we mentioned above leads to the formulation of projects for strengthening capabilities of scientific institutions in fisheries and aquaculture research, these projects might include biotechnology components to, for example, perform genetic studies on target organisms, clarify the movements of pelagic fish, prevent and diagnose important diseases afflicting target organisms, or improve reproductive success among culture animals.
The past history of the World Bank's science and technology lending shows that it is primarily directed towards countries with medium incomes. Marine biotechnology is an activity that is most suitable for middle income countries in which a considerable numbers of people are involved in the biological sciences. In particular, it is clear that advanced biotechnology requires a sophisticated research infrastructure and considerable long term investment.
Therefore, in the first instance, science and technology lending to initiate or enhance marine biotechnology might be aimed at countries that already have scientific institutes wherein sophisticated biotechnology R&D is proceeding, such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Cuba, India, Mexico and Thailand. In the second instance, the Bank could target countries that have lower level capabilities in the biological sciences, but in which large marine-related projects are under way that may benefit from marine biotechnology techniques and approaches. For example, marine biotechnology may be introduced into aquaculture, natural resource exploitation and other marine-related projects being undertaken in Ecuador, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and several of the South Pacific island countries. In these instances, it would be important that the marine biotechnology be deployed in such a manner that it fuses with traditional technologies already in use, enhancing their scope and
possibilities.
The specific action that the World Bank can take to support science and technology for development is to make funding available to governments so they can set up mechanisms for technology transfer that are similar to agricultural extension services that are already commonly found in developing countries. Specifically, public institutes, whether university or national research laboratory, should be encouraged to set up technology transfer units according to the terms that are outlined in Chapter 5. This process can be enhanced by the World Bank making available resources to governments so they can set up marine extension services. It has funded similar efforts in the past, especially in agriculture, so this type of effort should not present difficult problems to implement. If the World Bank decides to take up this suggestion, it might find a useful model in the U.S. National Sea Grant College Program that is funded by federal funds through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (Ragotzkie 1988).
Sea Grant operates through twenty-nine coastal programs, involving hundreds of scientists at about forty universities and research institutions. While Sea Grant provides an excellent mechanism for universities, industry and government to pursue coordinated efforts in R&D, its major function is to transfer marine science and technology from laboratories to technology end-users. It does so by mobilizing support for practically oriented research projects, and then acting to make information about these projects available to industry. The performance of the Sea Grant managers, and indeed of the program itself, is thus directly tied to its ability to transfer technology, so it is in the agency's best interest to make certain practical results flow from the R&D it sponsors.
Support to international research
The Bank does not as a rule support scientific research directly; the only exceptions are its support of CGIAR and WHO's Special Programme for Training and Research in Tropical Diseases. The relationship between the World Bank and CGIAR is described in Chapter 6; the World Bank may find it worthwhile to act so that CGIAR's purview is extended to include more marine-related activities. As the situation now stands, only one of the seventeen IARCs has an aquatic focus. In view of the possible contribution that the oceans can make to increasing the world's food supply through aquaculture and of being the source of unique drugs whose use could enhance mankind's health status, it is important that the World Bank encourage IARCs to take up research related to living aquatic resources and that additional IARCs should be established in regions whose development would be enhanced through marine biological and marine biotechnology R&D. If the latter option were taken up, it might prove
cost effective for CGIAR to upgrade existing national facilities devoted to marine biology, aquaculture or fisheries research.
<section>Support of environmental objectives</section>
Environmental concerns in some cases dictate whether a particular World Bank project should be carried out at all, in other cases they dictate how projects are implemented. Marine biotechnology may affect potential projects in three ways. First, marine biotechnology techniques may be used to monitor the possible effects of a project on the marine environment. This can be done through the use of biosensors, which may be designed to detect and monitor specific substances that may be emitted in the course of project activities, or molecular biology techniques may be used to analyze the chromosomes and/or genes of marine organisms to see if they have suffered damage from project activities.
Second, molecular biology techniques may be used to track the movement of pelagic organisms. It is now possible, for example, to determine the origin of a salmon caught on the high seas through genetic analysis. This will enable regulators to protect salmon whose existence is threatened because their migratory paths are vulnerable to human predation. Being able to determine which country "owns" salmon, or other pelagic fish, caught in the high seas may also have implications for international law.
Third, marine biotechnology techniques can be used in efforts to clarify the "health" status of coral reefs and mangroves. In particular, science now knows little about the juvenile and intermediate forms of invertebrates and plants that as adults populate reefs and mangroves. Yet, they are the organisms that are most vulnerable to pollutants or physical changes. The origin and fate of these tiny, planktonic forms are difficult to ascertain with present methods. These forms can be subjected to genetic analysis, using techniques such as RFLP and PCR, to clarify speciation. Analysis of their numbers and lineage can lead to a determination of which reef species are diminishing and the reasons why, as well as making it possible for scientists to clarify certain ecological phenomena such as reef dieoffs and plankton blooms.
The marine biotechnology techniques related to bioremediation may, of course, be used directly to clean up polluted marine environs, but we consider this possibility in the next section.
Relating directly environmental initiatives, there is at this time much discussion about criteria for lending of the newly established GEF. It is clear that at least two of the four sectors of the GEF will include activities where marine biotechnology could be components. One is international waterways and marine environments and the other is conservation of biological diversity. On improving marine environments we have already mentioned the reception facilities for wastes that the GEF is committed to constructing. Assisting cleanup of accidental spills of oil could be another activity. Monitoring of changes in marine environments could draw on the improvements of monitoring technologies that marine biotechnology has brought about.
Marine biodiversity is also covered by the GEF. There should be possibilities in demonstrating the potentials for using biological diversity in the seas for developing new products. An illustrative project that would show the value that biological diversity in the seas have for commercializing sea products might improve the interest of developing countries to maintaining their living marine resources.
<section>Support for private sector development</section>
Supporting PSD has become a major World Bank goal because it fulfills the Bank's primary objectives of reducing poverty and raising standards of living. The four types of activities the Bank uses to promote PSD are described in the World Bank's 1991 Annual Report. Most are generic; that is, their accomplishments should lead to PSD whether it is in agriculture, food industry, chemical industry or biotechnology-based industry. But one important point needs to be made concerning PSD related to biotechnology, namely that biotechnology-based industry, wherever it is to grow, must be closely tied to the research sector. To illustrate, say that the World Bank considers a project to establish an automobile manufacturing plant in a developing country. Although many of the technologies required in this endeavor will be complicated and some may be designated as high technologies, the implementation of this project could be done wholly without the involvement of universities or their
researchers because the technologies are known, their implementation requires engineers and technicians, and their operation will be the same regardless of where it is done.
The situation with biotechnology-based industry is different because it is science-based. In this case, the molecular control over the metabolism and reproduction of industrial organisms must be employed for applied purposes. This implies that the natural phenomena underlying these processes are sufficiently well known so that they can be manipulated for preconceived ends. Only welltrained scientists can do so. Further, many times when scientists elucidate a natural phenomenon, they simultaneously generate the knowledge that can drive an industrial process. For example, when a researcher locates and characterizes a gene in an organism that codes for the production of a specific protein, he or she in the same instance discovers a process that can be used by industry to manufacture that protein in vitro. Since this is the case, a biotechnology-based industry cannot be established in a country unless there is a close relationships between the research establishment and the
applied sector.
Referring to the concept development process discussed above, when considering projects involving biotechnology, research laboratories should be linked with technology end-users in industry, agriculture and health. As is discussed above, this has to be done from two directions. The first direction, that of universities and national research institutes reaching out to technology end-users, possibly through a Sea Grant-like approach, has been addressed. The second direction is the technology end-user accessing results from research done at public institutes. The World Bank, as part of national programs to assist indigenous industry, could make funding available for firms to establish advanced research and development units capable of adopting and adapting research results. This might be done by setting up a special funding agency within federal governments in, for example, ministries of commerce or industry. The intent of this new agency would be to provide loans at favorable
rates to small and medium businesses so they can hire the scientists and buy the equipment to perform the advanced research and pilot trials for new product development. Of course, this type of initiative would have to be integrated with other efforts to improve the business climate in a country, including business tax reform, adoption of intellectual property laws and safety regulations, and the possibility of firms being able to import required technology and supplies without undue hindrance. An example of how this can be done is provided by the Brazilian PADCT project discussed above, which includes a component that aims to improve on the ability of industry to innovate. The setting up of an advanced research and development unit by a firm should accomplish this objective.
The other PSD activity that is relevant to the promotion of biotechnology is its direct fostering of private enterprise, including providing support for entrepreneurial efforts (World Bank 1992). The Bank is involved in many sectors where there are possibilities for adding value to raw material products via biotechnology. This would increase economic return to the developing country producing the raw material and help it lessen its technological dependence on outsiders. Biotechnology could thus be suitable for several sectors (see Table 1).
An initiative that has environmental implications and that could employ marine and other biotechnology relates to the industry that specializes in pollution abatement and control. One of the sectors of that industry is remediation. The remediation industry is one of the fastest growing industries in the world; at present, its market is estimated to be $2 billion per year and its annual growth rate for the next five years is 25 percent (Chowdhury 1992). Bioremediation is one of the techniques used by this industry, usually when it involves treating polluted coasts and waterways.
Table 1. Sectors appropriate for marine biotechnology
Technology and time frame
Sector
Short term Long term
Industry
Bioremediation Sensors
Agriculture,
Genetic Specific
Aquaculture
Modification Proteins
Health
Diagnostics Pharmaceuticals
Transportation Bioremediation Biofilms Sanitation Bioremediation Sensor
The remediation industry is now concentrated in industrial countries. But it is certain to spread to developing countries, especially so since the technology is available, it is relatively cheap, there are many opportunities for local research to improve bioremediating organisms and techniques, and there are many situations where bioremediation can be employed immediately for great effect.
Another PSD-type project could be aimed at establishing regional-based firms to raise and maintain broodstock and to enhance seed production for aquaculture industry. This is one of the major bottlenecks to aquaculture. For example, India's shrimp aquaculture industry requires about 2 billion fry per year and the industry's demand increases 10 percent every year (Kant 1991). Yet, only 17 hatcheries are in operation, each producing fewer than 40 million fry. Aquaculturists make up the difference by collecting from the wild, which is environmentally damaging. This situation is not unique; the major constraint on mollusc aquaculture in Asia is the lack of seed (Lovatelli 1990). Making available funding for setting up hatcheries, seed production units, and facilities for maintaining broodstock would be environmentally kind and good business.
The final point regarding PSD, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), which is the member of the World Bank group that supplies direct project financing for private investments in developing countries, has the potential to support projects that might seem too risky for political or commercial reasons in developing countries. Capitalizing on the stability that IFC provides in the development of new commercial projects, and considering the smaller projects that it can support, the IFC could support the development of marine biological joint ventures. Before it can do so, however, the IFC would have to develop a stronger technical competence in the field so that it can properly assess the feasibility of biotechnology projects, thus minimizing the risk of initial failures.
<section>Chapter 8</section>
<section>Conclusion</section>
When exploring options for marine biotechnology for developing countries, it became clear that we must appraise a larger issue first. To wit, what is appropriate assistance to developing countries for biotechnology programs or projects? We have shown in Chapter 2 and elsewhere in this report that of all the high technologies, biotechnology is the most appropriate for developing countries because: entry into the field is easier and costs less than of the other high technologies; many developing countries have an existing base in the natural sciences from which biotechnology can develop and grow; many developing countries have rich natural resources that can be exploited via biotechnology for sustainable, environmentally sound economic development; and certain problems facing populations in developing countries related to disease, food supply, environmental degradation and energy supply may be amenable to technical solutions that only biotechnology can provide. In recognition
of the promises that biotechnology holds, scientists and political leaders of developing countries have already requested assistance from many public and private organizations, who have responded by sponsoring activities designed to help enhance present capabilities in biotechnology and acquire new ones.
The World Bank has not been one of these organizations, except in two cases: in large projects in Brazil and Indonesia that have sizeable biotechnology components, and in its support of CGIAR that funds some aquaculture and biotechnology R&D. The field has grown to such an extent and has become so
important, however, that henceforth the World Bank must take its potentials into account.
Developing this view further, it is realistic to believe that in the future, as in the past, the Bank will be called on to provide assistance to countries to improve their agriculture. In these cases, plant biotechnology could well become an element in projects to, for example, increase the resistance of plants to diseases or pests, increase the ability of crops to grow under arid conditions, design crops to tolerate brackish water, or for other purposes that helps the particular country in question. In other cases biotechnology may be used in projects having health objectives to, for example, to improve drugs or develop vaccines; to expand industrial capabilities by, for example, utilizing agricultural wastes for alcohol production; and so forth. Similarly, projects aimed at assisting island countries or countries with significant marine resources may include marine biotechnology components for objectives such as increasing yields from aquaculture, marine natural products
development, the improvement of public health, or to clean polluted coastlines. The point of the foregoing is that a Bank officer, when planning wide-ranging projects on land or related to the sea, whether in the agriculture, health, industry or environment sector, may want to consider the possible benefits that the application of biotechnology techniques may have for reaching project objectives, something that probably has not been done so often in the past.
<section>Appendix A Marine biotechnology and related R&D institutions in developing countries</section>
Short questionnaires were sent to a select number of scientists in developing countries who had been identified as being involved with marine biotechnology or biotechnology-related areas. The answers to these questionnaires, suitably organized, are set forth in the sections that follow. Thus, each section is devoted to one country. It begins by naming the ministry or other authority under whose purview marine biotechnology falls. If possible, the person in charge is named. Thereafter the country's research institutes performing marine biotechnology, or related R&D, are listed. When known, the R&D areas of institutes are specified.
The information should be used with caution for two reasons. First, since marine biotechnology, and its related areas, is rapidly expanding, the work programs of research institutes are also growing and changing. As a result, new departments are being set up, old departments expanded, and additional scientists are being hired to staff them. Administrative changes may have been instituted at local and national levels that reflect the growing importance of marine biotechnology. For these reasons, the information provided here should be considered a "snapshot" of a rapidly developing and changing field, one that depicts the situation as it existed in late 1991. Second, we were entirely dependent on information supplied by persons who head or work at the institutions that are listed. Some of this information may represent wishes or aspirations rather than present reality.
Brazil.
A. The agency responsible for marine-related R&D is the Coordenadoria de Ciencias da Vida (Dr. Celina Roitman), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnológico. Strategic planning for the utilization of marine resources is done by the Comissâo Interminesterial de Recursos de Mar (CIRM); plans are implemented by the Secretaria Ciéncia e Tecnologia (SCT) (Mr. Paulo Cesar Goncalves Egler).
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Universidade Federal do Maranhao (UFMA), Fortaleza.
a. LABOMAR: marine biology.
2. Universidade Federal Rural de Perambuco, Dois Irmâos.
a. Departemento de Engenharia de Pesca.
b. Departemento de Biologia.
3. Universidade Federal de Alagoas, Maceio: marine biology.
4. Universidade Federal de Sergipe, Aracaju.
a. Departemento de Biologia:: mangrove biology.
5. FIPERJ, Rio de Janeiro: aquaculture.
6. Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro.
a. Departemento de Oceanografia: marine biology, marine pollution.
7. Instituto de Estudos do Mar Almirante Paulo Moreira, Arraial do Cabo: macroalgae .
8. Universidade de Sâo Paulo, Sâo Paulo.
a. Departemento de Zoologia: shrimp diagnostics.
b. Instituto de Biociéncias: shrimp baculovirus, macroalgae.
c. Instituto Oceanográfico: marine biology, marine pollution, ichtyology.
9. Universidade Federal do Paraná, Paranaguá.
a. Centro de Biologia Marina: marine biology, plankton studies, bacteriobentos in mangroves.
10. Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre.
a. CECO: marine ecology.
11. Fundaçâo Universidade do Rio Grande, Rio Grande.
a. Departemento de Biologia: phytoplankton studies.
b. Departemento de Biologia e Anatomia: fish pathology.
c. Departemento do Oceanografia: marine biology.
d. Laboratorio de Fitoplâncton: marine biology.
12. Universidade Federal da Bahia, Bahia.
a. Instituto de Biologia: algae bank, bioassay of water quality, shrimp and oyster aquaculture.
13. Universidade Federale do Santa Catarina, Florianópolis.
a. Departemento de Aquicultura: shrimp aquaculture, reproductive fish and shrimp technologies.
b. Departemento de Biologia: bioassay of marine waters, antioxidant protection of marine vertebrates, crustacean immunology, bacterial accumulation by mussels and oysters.
c. Departemento de Bioquimica: sea anemone toxins.
d. Departemento de Zooligia: shrimp pathology.
Chile.
A. The authority having the main responsibility for marine biotechnology or related areas is the Subsecretaría de Pesca (Mr. Andrés Couve) of the Minesterio de Planificación (Mr. Sergio Molina). Other agencies having responsibilities in these fields are the Corporación de Fomento (Mr. René Abeliuk) and the Comité Oceanográfico Nacional (Mr. Hugo Gorziglia Antolini). In addition, Chile has a national biotechnology program that is guided by the Comité Nacional de Biotecnología (Dr. Jorge Allende).
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Universidad Católica de Valparaiso, Valparaiso.
a. Instituto de Biología: cloning of genes from marine microorganisms; reproduction of marine organisms; ecology of aquatic populations.
b. Escuela de Ciencias del Mar: pathology of salmonids; evaluation of fish feed; reproductive control in fish; production of triploid salmonids; algal and mollusc aquaculture; marine pollution research.
c. Escuela de Alimentos: study of protein structure and enzymes.
d. Escuela de Ingeniería Bioquímica: utilization of microalgae; pilot plant production of algal products, including pigments, proteins and lipids.
e. Escuela de Ingenería Química: lipid extraction.
f. Laboratory at Viña: macroalgae tissue culture.
2. Universidad de Magallanes, Punta Arenas.
a. Instituto de la Patagonia: environmental protection.
3. Instituto de Fomento Pesquero, Santiago (Dr. Patricio Bernal Ponce).
a. Laboratory at Putemún (in cooperation with the Universidad Católica de Chile): study and management of marine resources, including mollusks and algae; induction of mussel larvae metamorphosis.
b. Laboratory at Coyhaique: aquaculture pertaining to salmonids.
4. Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago: studies on macroalgae and pigment production.
5. Universidad Católica de Chile, Sede Talcahuano, Talcahuano: macroalgae genetics.
6. Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, studies on microalgae and pigment production.
7. Universidad de Santiago, Santiago: studies on crab and pigment production.
8. Lefersa Alimentos, Santiago: studies on feed for salmonids.
Egypt.
A. The Ministry of Agriculture has responsibility for fresh water fisheries and aquaculture, while the National Institute of Marine Sciences and Fisheries, Academy of Scientific Research and Technology, Ministry of Scientific Research is responsible for marine living resources and related R&D.
B. R&D Institutes.
1. National Institute for Marine Sciences and Fisheries, Cairo.
2. Egyptian Authority for Fisheries and Fishing Gear, Alexandria.
3. Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo.
a. Agricultural Development Project of Eastern Abbassa.
b. General Authority for Fish Resources Development.
c. Maryoot Project for Aquaculture.
4. Suez Canal University, El-Arish.
a. Faculty of Environmental Agriculture.
Hong Kong.
A. Marine biotechnology appears to fall under the purview of the Agriculture and Fisheries Department, Hong Kong Government.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Marine Science Laboratory, Department of Biology, Chinese University of Hong Kong: fish and shrimp mariculture.
India.
A. Major responsibility for biotechnology in India rests with the Department of Biotechnology (Dr. C. R. Bhatya) of the Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology. Responsibility for marine affairs lies with the Department of Ocean Development (Dr. S.N. Dwivedi). The Marine Products Export Development Authority (Mr. Amitabh Kant), Ministry of Commerce, has responsibility for the development of India's seafood industry, including export production and promotion.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. National Institute of Oceanography, Dona Paula, Goal
a. Division of Microbiology: hydrolytic enzymes from marine bacteria; microalgal production of beta carotene, glycerol and proteins; screening of marine microorganisms for bioactive compounds; shrimp aquaculture; algal tissue culture.
b. Marine Corrosion and Materials Research Division: extracellular production by marine microorganisms; bioremediation.
2. Goa University, Taleigo, Goal
a. Department of Marine Biotechnology.
b. Department of Marine Sciences (in Bambolim): marine biology, marine microorganisms.
3. Central Marine Research Institute, Cochin, Kerala.
4. Sri Paramakalyani College, Kallidaikurichi.
a. Post Graduate Department of Microbiology: screening of marine bacteria, algae and invertebrates for bioactive compounds.
5. Centre for Advanced Study in Marine Biology, Porto Nova.
6. Anna University, Guindy, Madras. a. Centre for Water Resources.
7. Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kochi.
a. School of Marine Sciences: marine bacterial enzymes as find chemicals; immobilized enzyme systems for water quality control; marine microbial enzymes; fish feed formulation; algal cultivation; pollution toxicology.
8. Calcutta University, Calcutta, West Bengal.
a. Department of Marine Sciences: intertidal ecology; ecology of mangroves.
9. Beshampur University, Beshampur, Orissa.
a. Department of Marine Sciences: chemistry of the sea.
10. Andrah University, Waltair, Andrah Pradesh.
a. Department of Marine Sciences: marine biology.
11. Kerala University, Trivandrum.
a. Department of Aquatic Biology and Fisheries: marine biology; marine microbial enzymes; bioactive compounds from marine organisms; marine ecology.
12. Karnataka University, Karwar, Karnataka.
a. Department of Marine Biology: marine biology.
13. Government Institute of Science, Aurangabad.
a. Department of Microbiology: halophilic microorganisms; bioremediation.
Malaysia.
A. Authority to be determined.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. School of Biological Sciences, University of Malaysia, Penang.
2. Faculty of Biology, National University of Malaysia, Selangor.
Mexico.
A. The authority responsible for all science and technology in Mexico is the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACYT), México, D.F.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Centro de Investigación Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada, Baja California.
a. Laboratorio de Biotecnología Marina: fish vaccines; detection of Vibrio species; pollution control; fermentation by marine bacteria.
2. Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas de Baja California Sur, La Paz, Baja California.
3. UABCS Departemento de Biología Marina, La Paz, Baja California.
4. E.N.B.C. - I.P.N., Santo Tomás, Mexico D.F.
5. Departemento de Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas - UNAM, Mexico D.F.
6. Sección de Biotecnología, Instituto Tecnológico de Merida , Yucatan.
Nigeria.
A. The authority responsible for all science and technology is the Federal Ministry of Science and Technology (Dr. G. Ezekwe).
B. R&D Institutions.
1. University of Port Harcourt, Port Harcourt.
a. Department of Microbiology: bioremediation; the isolation of biopolymers from marine bacteria and algae.
2. Nigerian Institute for Marine Biology and Oceanography, Lagos: fisheries and oceanography.
3. Imo State University, Okigwe, Imo State.
People's Republic of China.
A. There appears to be an overlap of responsibilities for marine biotechnology in China. The Administration for Science and Technology (Mr. Song Chian) seems to have major responsibility for scientific research, while the Scientific and Technological Section (Dr. W.H. Yang) of the State Oceanic Administration is responsible for marine-related research. Further, the Department of Earth Sciences (Dr. Yang Sheng) of the Bureau of Earth Sciences and the Bureau of Aquatic Products of the Ministry of National Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fishery also have interest in marine biotechnology. In addition, the Marine Sciences Section (Dr. Y.B. Fan) of the National Natural Science Foundation of China and the Bureau of Bioscience and Biotechnology (Dr. G.Z. Meng) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences are involved with biotechnology activities. The delineation of authority between these agencies vis-à-vis marine biotechnology remains to be clarified.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Ocean University of Qingdao, Qingdao, Shandong.
a. Marine Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Marine Biology: bioadhesion; biefouling; natural chemicals from marine bacteria; studies on human pathogens in coastal waters; studies on infectious diseases afflicting prawn.
b. Marine Genetics Laboratory, Department of Marine Biology: genetics of prawns and macroalgae.
2. Institute of Oceanology, Academia Sinica, Qingdeo, Shandong.
a. Marine Microbiology Laboratory: studies on diseases afflicting the aquaculture of prawns and macroalgae.
b. Seaweeds Laboratory: genetics of macroalgae; development of productive techniques for macroalgae.
c. Invertebrate Laboratory: scallop aquaculture; prawn aquaculture; biofouling.
3. Experimental Marine Biology Laboratory, Academia Sinica, Qingdao, Shandong: research on transgenic fish; the construction of a fish gene library; photosynthesis of algae; applications for Spirulina; the immobilization of algae and the use of algae in bioreactors; algae tissue culture; in vitro fertilization of shrimp and scallops; transgenic scallops; and manipulation of reproductive processes in shrimp and scallops.
4. Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Qingdao, Shandong: algae and prawn aquaculture; study of diseases afflicting aquaculture; technologies of fisheries products.
5. First Institute of Oceanography, Qingdao, Shandong: marine ecology; prevention of fish diseases.
6. Second Institute of Oceanography, Hang Zhou: biochemistry of marine organisms.
7. Third Institute of Oceanography, Xiamen: expression of fish growth hormone in E. coli; biochemical monitoring of marine pollutants; utilization of natural products from oysters, horseshoe crab, and others; accumulation of heavy metals by fish.
8. Shanghai Fisheries University, Shanghai: studies on macroalgae.
9. South China Sea Institute of Oceanology: research on Spirulina.
10. Institute of Genetics, Academia Sinica, Beijing: antifreeze protein from P. yokohamae.
11. Institute of Hydrobiology, Academia Sinica: nitrogen fixation in cyanobacter.
Peru.
A. The agency that is responsible for science and technology is the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecoologla, while the Fondo de Reactivacíon del Sector Pesquero any. Luis Garayar Melendez) of the Ministerio de Pesquería (Dr. Félix Canal Torres) has responsibility over ocean resources, including aquaculture.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Instituto del Mar del Peru, Callao: This institute is responsible for R&D pertaining to fisheries, aquaculture, and other marine activities. It has four regional, coastal laboratories at Chimbote, Ilo, Paita and Pisco, as well as three research vessels.
2. Universidad Nacional Jorge Basadre Grohman, Casilla.
3. Universidad Nacional Faustino Sanchez Carrión de Huacho, San Isidro.
4. Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Casilla.
a. Biological Sciences Faculty: macroalgae aquaculture, mollusc aquaculture, plankton upwelling, reproduction in fishes and mollusks.
5. Universidad Federico Villareal, Miraflora.
a. Facultad de Oceanografía, Pesquería y Ciencias Alimentarias: heavy metals pollution in ocean, macroalgae taxonomy.
6. Universidad Nacional de Trujillo: fish biology, invertebrate ecology.
7. Universidad Nacional de Chiclayo "Pedro Ruiz Gal lo": sand beach ecology.
8. Universidad Nacional de Arequipa: marine resources evaluation.
9. Centro de Investigacíon de Bioquírnica y Nutricíon.
10. Instituto Tecuológico Pesquero: marine natural products, processing of marine living resources.
Philippines.
A. The agency having responsibility over science and technology is the Department of Science and Technology (Mr. Ceferino Follosco). The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, Department of Agriculture, has as its name suggests authority over aquatic resources.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. University of the Philippines at Los Banos.
a. Learning Resource Center: studies on fresh-water algae as a source of carrageenan.
b. Marine Science Institute: genetic studies on Eucheuma, culture of Gelidiella, biology and ecology of Saragassum.
c. Seaweed Information Center (in Quezon City), Marine Science Institute: studies on macroalgae.
2. College of Fisheries, University of the Philippines in the Visayas: seaweed processing and utilization.
3. College of Fisheries, Bicol University: seaweed processing and utilization.
4. Marine Biological Laboratory, Silliman University, Dumaguete City: research on seaweed species.
5. University of San Carlos,Cebu: research on seaweed species.
6. Aquaculture Department of the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center, Iloilo: research on Gracilaria biology, culture and processing.
7. Fisheries Resources Research Division, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources: field research on macroalgae.
8. Marine Colloids, Inc., Cebu City: commercial production of carrageenan from the alga Eucheuma
9. FMC Corporation: research on commercially valuable macroalgae.
Republic of Korea.
A. The Office of Fisheries (Mr. SeongHwan Hah), Fisheries Research and Development Agency, is in charge of fisheries R&D.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. National Fisheries University of Pusan, Pusan.
a. Department of Aquaculture.
b. Department of Microbiology.
c. Department of Biological Science and Technology.
d. Department of Fish Pathology.
e. Department of Marine Biology.
f. Department of Applied Chemistry.
g. Institute of Marine Sciences.
h. Institute of Fishing Science and Technology.
i. Institute of Sea Food Science. j. Institute of Sea Culture.
l. Institute of Life Science and Biotechnology.
1. Environmental Research Institute.
2. Korean Ocean Research and Development Institute, Seoul.
Taiwan (China).
A. Fundamental research in biotechnology is the responsibility of the Life Sciences Division (Dr. Jung-Yaw Lin), National Science Council, while the implementation of the National Development Plan on Marine Science and Technology, 1991 - 1995, which includes marine biotechnology, falls under the purview of Fisheries Department Dr. Jen-Chyuan Lee), Council of Agriculture.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Academia Sinica, Taipei.
a. Institute of Chemistry: seaweed polysaccharides.
b. Institute of Zoology: fish hormonal regulation, transgenic abalone, transgenic fresh and saltwater fish, IPN virus studies, gene expression of RNA virus in fish, diagnostic kits for eel and shrimp viral diseases.
2. Fisheries Research Institute, Tainan: field experiments of fish treated with hormones.
3. Fisheries Research Institute, Penhu: seaweed stock improvement.
4. Kaohsiung Medical School.
a. Department of Microbiology: studies on gonyautoxins.
b. Department of Pharmacy: natural products from soft corals, monoclonal antibodies for gonyautoxins.
5. National Chung Hsing University.
a. Institute of Botany: proteins from seaweed.
b. Institute of Soil: marine bacteria in pond soil.
6. National Defense Medical College.
a. Department of Microbiology and Immunology: marine actinomycetes exploitation.
7. National Pingtung Agriculture College: fish Iymphocystic viral studies.
8. National Sun Yat-sen University.
a. Department of Biology: luminescent bacteria as biosensors.
b. Department of Marine Resources: zoology of corals, natural products from coral-associated bacteria.
9. National Taiwan Normal University.
a. Department of Biology: fish hormone studies.
10. National Taiwan Ocean University.
a. Department of Aquaculture: seaweed protoplasts, marine bacteria in aquaculture, enzyme inhibitors from marine bacteria, transgenic prawn.
b. Department of Food Science: marine toxins, natural products from bacteria.
11. National Taiwan University.
a. Department of Agricultural Chemistry: bioremediation, waste water treatment with halophytes.
b. Department of Botany: detection kits for Vibrio anguillarum.
c. Department of Zoology: fish hormone studies, IPN viral studies, eel herpes viral studies, eel disease diagnostic kits.
d. Institute of Biological Chemistry: studies on fish hormones.
e. Institute of Fisheries Science: fish hormone studies, seaweed natural products, eel vaccines against Edwardsiella and Aeromonas, vaccine for shrimp vibriosis, studies on adjuvants for shrimp vaccine.
f. Institute of Oceanography: seaweed biology, biology of soft corals, marine thermotropic bacteria utilization.
12. National Tsing Hua University.
a. Department of Chemistry: natural products from seaweeds.
b. Institute of Life Science: exotoxin from Edwardsiella.
13. Taiwan Provincial Research Institute for Animal Health: eel vaccines against Edwardsiella and Aeromonas.
14. Tong Wu University.
a. Department of Microbiology: natural products from marine bacteria.
15. Yang Ming Medical School.
a. Department of Biochemistry: natural products from marine bacteria.
Thailand.
A. Responsibility for marine biotechnology appears to be split between two agencies. On the one hand, responsibility for the national biotechnology plan rests with the National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (Dr. Bhumiratana), Science and Technology Development Agency. On the other, marine resources fall under the authority of the Department of Fisheries (Dr. P. Surasvadee), Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Department of Microbiology, King Mongdut's Institute of Technology, Thonburi: improvement of bacterial strains for fermentation of fish sauce.
2. Institute of Marine Science, Burapha University, Chonburi: screening of marine bacteria, phytoplankton and zooplankton for biologically active substances; the study of heavy metal resistance in microalgae.
3. Department of Marine Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok:: improvement of aquaculture practices.
4. Aquatic Resource Research Institute: management of aquatic resources in fresh and salt water, coastal zone resource management.
5. Srinakharinwirot University, Prasarnmit Campus, Bangkok: selection of agarbearing macroalgae for aquaculture; improving agar production of the alga Gracilaria.
6. Brackishwater Fisheries Division, Kasetsart University, Bangkok: mariculture of black tiger shrimp.
7. Faculty of Natural Resources, Prince of Songkla University, Haadyai.
8. Marine Biotechnology Laboratories, a specialized laboratory of the National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, located at the Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok: aquatic animal health, marine natural products development.
9. Marine Biological and Fishery Research Institute, Department of Fishery, Phuket: aquaculture and marine natural products development.
Uruguay.
A. The ministry most concerned with marine biotechnology will be determined.
B. R&D Institutions.
1. Instituto de Investigaciones Pesqueras, Universidad de la República, Montevideo: animal feed from fish; the use of proteolytic marine yeast to produce fish protein concentrate.
<section>Appendix B Special equipment requirements for advanced biotechnology</section>
Equipment requirements for biotechnology R&D include optical microscopes, dissecting scopes, centrifuges, incubators, sterilizers, tube and flask shakers, glass and plastic ware, chemicals, media, controlled lights, and growth chambers and greenhouses. The more specialized merino biotechnology research requires aquaria (i.e., open ponds and closed tanks) together with a seawater system for supporting it; and shops for maintaining, repairing and, as need be, constructing this specialized equipment. Some research in marine biotechnology requires siting the laboratory close to the ocean; other work (e.g., natural marine products R&D) is not site dependent. All biotechnology R&D institutions should provide strong support facilities, such as libraries, electronic shops, technical equipment service, information and computer services.
The material requirements for rDNA technology are significant, as Tables B. 1 and B.2 demonstrate. Items listed in Table B.1 are those required by a laboratory wishing to take up plant biotechnology research; the equipment demands for biomedical research would be greater. Those found in Table B.2 are needed to perform exceedingly sophisticated research; in developing countries some items may be found only in a national or regional research institute. When examining the two tables, keep in mind that equipment upkeep requires a service unit manned by skilled maintenance and repair technicians and possessing an adequate inventory of spare parts. Without such backup, the equipment will soon break down and stay down. Further, each piece of equipment listed in Table B.2 requires the services or a specially trained technician.
Table B.1 Basic equipment for biotechnology R&D
Item Approximate price
Computer for sequence analysis
CO[2] incubator
Digitizer
Eloctrophoresis separation equipment
Freezer (to -70. C)
High-speed refrigerated centrifuge
Inverted phase microscope
Liquid air pump with a 180-liter
storage tank
Research -grade double-beam
spectrophotometer
Scanning densitometer
Scintillation counter
Ultracentrifuge
Their reagent requirements are also prodigious; for example, in the United States a heavily used automated DNA sequencer can consume about $40,000 worth of expendable supplies per year.
Monoclonal antibody work will require facilities for culturing animal cells, an animal house, appropriate animals, and the services of one or more animal handlers.
The chemical and special substances needs of a biotechnology laboratory are considerable, including radioisotopes, sera, antisera, enzymes, restriction enzymes, media, buffers, antibiotics, and others. In the United States, a researcher or technician requires chemicals and reagents whose costs range from $5,000 to $10,000 per year. Costs of these expendable supplies would un
doubtedly be higher in developing countries as most must be imported. Further, since many of these reagents deteriorate rapidly at ambient temperature, suppliers must take elaborate measures to make certain that they are properly handled in shipping and storage.
Equipment and supplies, while of lesser importance than highly trained scientific personnel, are essential ingredients to the carrying out of research; without them some projects must be foregone, others will be curtailed. Equipment limitations could also prevent the development of advanced capabilities in biotechnology.
Table B.2. Highly sophisticated equipment for biotechnology R&D
Item
Approximate price
Automated DNA sequencer
Flow cytometer
Oligonucleotide synthesizer(manual model)
Oligonuclootide synthesizer(automated system)
<section>Appendix C Definitions of marine biotechnology by scientists in industrial and developing countries</section>
Marine is the integration of advances in marine microbiology, marine biochemistry (including cell biology, molecular biology and molecular genetics), marine biology and process engineering, for application in such areas as food and feed industry, pharmaceutical industry, environmental pollution and energy, medical diagnostics, fermentation industry, and chemical industry. (Dr. Gideon Abu, Department of Microbiology, Box 274, University of Port Harcourt, Port Harcourt, Nigeria).
"The term biotechnology generally implies the application of technology to organisms. In other words, we try to mould the organisms or its function to achieve our target. Nonetheless, to say better exploration and exploitation of the ocean and the organisms there in for the transmogrification of mankind. We would like to define marine biotechnology as the application of genetic engineering to marine sciences i.e. to utilize the untapped gene pool in:
1. The transport of minerals (nutrient cycle)
2. Novel photosynthetic system (primary production)
3. Utilization of H2S, NH3, H2 etc (chemosynthesis)
4. Production of fish, mollusks, crustaceans in natural and hatchery system (secondary and tertiary production)
5. Marine pheromones, toxins, and pharmacological compounds.. (Dr. Shanta Achuthankutty, National Institute of Oceanography, Dona Paula, Goa 403 004, India).
"I consider that any proven technology, which is aided by the biological systems, can be called biotechnology, so one can apply this definition to marine biotechnology." (Dr. M.S. Andhale, Department of Microbiology, Government Institute of Science, Nipatniranjan, A'bad Caves Road, Aurangabad 431004, India).
"Marine biotechnology is a branch of marine science dealing with marine organisms to enhance the production of food, feed and chemicals for the betterment of mankind." (Dr. N.B. Bhosle, National Institute of Oceanography, Dona Paula, Goa-403 004, India).
"Given the fact that biotechnology is any aspect of biological system that makes money, I would say that marine biotechnology is any aspect of biotechnology that either directly concerns aquatic (marine and freshwater) systems or had as its origin an aquatic biological system". (Dr. Joseph Bonavenatura, Director Marine Biomedical Center, Duke University Marine Laboratory, North Carolina).
"Marine biotechnology can be defined as the efficient utilization of marine living resources or their components to provide desirable products and services." (Dr. M. Chandrasekaran, Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Applied Chemistry, Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kochi 682022, India).
"The application of biological sciences which utilizes living marine organisms, their cells or parts of cells to produce good and services." (Dr. S.T. Chang, Department of Biology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong).
"Marine biotechnology, an extension of marine biology, blends science and technology to develop the methods for mass production and processing of marine organisms for a wide range of industrial and commercial uses." (Dr. Saipin Chaiyana Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, King Mongkut's Institute of Technology Thonburi, Bangmod, Rasburana Bangkok 10140, Thailand).
"In my opinion, the task of biotechnology is to synthesize the modern theory and methods of engineering and biology, to research the variations of biological structure and function on different level and artificially to control these variations by using engineering and technique, in order to develop some new types of industry or new biological products on a large scale, such as genetic engineering, cell engineering, enzyme engineering, microbial engineering biochemical engineering and the technique of comprehensive utilization for biological resources." (Dr. Chen Dou, Institute of Oceanology, Academia Sinica, 7 Nan-Hai Road, Qingdao, Shandong, Peoples Republic of China).
Our definition of marine biotechnology is the use of biotechnology for studies of marine organisms or the use of marine organisms for applications in the field of biotechnology." (Dr. Bert Ely, Director Institute for Biological Research and Technology, University of South Carolina, S.C.).
"I would want to define marine biotechnology as studies and development of marine (aquatic) resources for human welfare using the available biomolecular tools as well as developing newer and better research tools for application and improvement enhancement of our understanding of marine (aquatic) life in general. (Dr. S.O. Emejuaiwe, Imo State University, P.M.B. 2000, Okigwe, Imo State, Nigeria).
"I would like to define marine biotechnology from my understanding that: any marine biological knowledge which could be applied to increase yield or marine products is marine biotechnology. Marine biotechnology is very wide in the sense, there are a lot of things to be done in the field of marine biotechnology. For example, only marine bacteria and marine plankton can play very important role in marine biotechnology." (Dr. Twee Hormchong, Director Institute of Marine Science, Burpha University, Bangsaen, Chonburi 20131, Thailand).
"I would say that marine biotechnology is the use of all the tools and knowledge in the life sciences to produce a desired effect on or for mankind." (Dr. Robert S. Jones, Director Marine Science Institute, University of Texas at Austin, Texas).
"I define marine biotechnology as: The use of marine organisms or their genetic information, for applications on aquaculture, pharmacology, and pollution control." (Dr. M.L. Lizarraga-Partida, Centro de Investigacion Cientifica y de Educacion Superior de Ensenada, Av. Espinoza No. 843, Apartado Postal 2732, Ensenada, Baja California, Mexico).
"Marine biotechnology is the application of marine organisms including their systems or processes for the manufacture of industrial products and for the practical solution of problems created by human activity.. (Milagrosa R. Martinez, Associate professor and Director, Learning Resources Center, University of Philippines at Los Banos, College. Laguna 3720 Philippines).
"Marine biotechnology is the science dealing with the study of marine organisms (preferentially microorganisms and plants) at a molecular level, specially on their genetic structure and on the techniques that could be used to modify or improve their genomes in order to produce substance (food, medicines, etc) at a high quality and quantity level or to degrade debris and undesirable substances in by-products useful to mankind.. (Dr. Enrique C. Mateo, Fondo de Reactivacion del Sector Pesqueria, German Schereiber 198, Francia 726 - Miraflores, Lima, Peru).
Marine biotechnology as the application of molecular biological techniques/methods to the production or modification of potential commercial products. This might include the use of marine species for the application, or the use of molecular big-techniques in the marine environment.. (Dr. David L. Nebert, Assistant Director for Research and Administration, Institute of Marine Science, University of Alaska-Fairbanks, Alaska).
The definition about marine biotechnology managed by the Institute is the same used in other Latin America countries and in Europe, any technology used to increase production where the final product has commercial importance. In this sense, in USA and Canada this concept is much more restricted and its use has been applied to technology where only DNA is manipulated. (Dr. Patricio Bernal Ponce, Executive Director, Instituto de Fomento Pesquero, Jose Domingo Canas 2277, Casilla 1287, Santiago, Chile).
"Marine biotechnology is the manipulation of marine organisms to produce a beneficial product for humankind.. (Dr. Kent S. Price, Associate Dean, College of Marine Studies, Lewes, Delaware).
The manipulation and/or use of all or part of a specific marine biological system to generate a desired product or products.. (Dr. Donald W. Renn, Senior Research Fellow, FMC Corporation, Maine).
I shall define marine biotechnology as the commercial exploitation of living marine organisms or their components. The organisms will include microbes, and also plants as well as animals; the later will encompass the application of molecular biology and cell culture techniques.. (P.M. Satheesh Seshaiya, Post Graduate Lecturer in Microbiology, Post Graduate Department of Microbiology, Sri Paramakalyani College, 29 West Car Street, Kallidaikurichi 627 416, Tamilnadu, India).
I would define marine biotechnology simply as the application of the techniques of modern molecular biology to marine biology. It covers the use of these techniques to study the biology of marine organisms as well as exploit practical applications of molecules derived from marine organisms. (Dr. Norman R. Wainwright, Director of Research, Associates of Cape Cod, Inc., Massachusetts).
<section>Abbreviations, acronyms and data note</section>
ADB
Asian Development Bank
AFDB
African Development Bank
AVHRR
advanced very high resolution radiometer
BL1 (BL2, BL3 or BL4)
biosafety level 1 (2, 3 or 4) of the NIH guidelines
C
Celsius
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
COMAR
Coastal and Marine Program
CZCS
coastal zone color scanner
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DLR
Deutsche Forschungs für Luft und Raumfuhrt
EBRD
European Bank; for Reconstruction and Development
E. coli
Escherichia coli
ECU
European currency unit
EIB
European Investment Bank
ERS
type of European satellite
EUREKA
European Research Coordinating Agency
FAO
U. N. Food and Agricultural Organization
FDA
U.S. Foot and Drug Administration
GABA
gamma-arninobutyric acid
GEP
Global Environmental Facility
GESAMP
Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution
GIAM
Glob&1 impacts of Applied Microbiology
GIFT
genetic improvement of farmed tilapias
GLOSS
global sea-level observing system
GMAG
Genetic Manipulation Advisory Group (United Kingdom)
GOOS
Global Ocean Observing System
HCMM
heat capacity mapping mission
hGH
human growth hormone
IARCs
International Agricultural Research Centers
IBC
Institutional Biosafety Committee
ICES
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea
ICGEB
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
ICLARM
International Centro for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDB
Inter-American Development Bank
IFC
Intemational Finance Corporation
IGLOSS
Integrated Global Ocean System
IHN
infectious hematopoietic necrosis
IMO
International Maritime Organization
IOC
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
JERS
type of Japanese satellite
KFA
type of Russian satellite
LAL
Limulus amebocyte Iysate
LANDSAT
Type of U.S. satellite
MAB
Man and the Biosphere Programme
MIRCEN
Microbial Resource Center
MSS
multispectral scanner
NCI
U.S. National Cancer Institute
NGO
non-governmental organization
NIH
U.S. National Institutes of Health
NOAA
U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NRC
U.S. National Research Council
OECD
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OPEC
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
PAN
panchromatic
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PrepCom
Preparatory Committee
PSD
private sector development
RAC
U.S. Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
rDNA
recombinant DNA
R&D
research and development
RFLP
restriction fragment length polymorphism
SAR
synthetic aperture radar
SLAR
side-looking airborne radar
SPOT
type of French satellite
tGH
trout growth hormone
TM
thermal mapper
U.N. or UN
United Nations
UNCED
U.N. Conference on Environment and Development
UNDP
U.N. Development Programme
UNEP
U.N. Environment Programme
UNESCO
U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNIDO
U.N. Industrial Development Organization
U.S. or USA
United Stabs
USDA
U.S. Department of Agriculture
WHO
World Health Organization
XS
multispectral (3-band)
<section>Glossary of technical terms</section>
Aerobic requiring oxygen.
Amino acid any of a group of twenty chemicals that are linked together in various combinations to form peptides or proteins.
Anabolisrn see metabolism.
Anaerobic without oxygen.
Antibody a specific protein molecule produced by an organism's immunological defense system when it is challenged by a foreign substance (the antigen). The antibody neutralizes the antigen by binding to it.
Antigen a substance that when introduced into an organism elicits from it an immunological defensive response. Many living microorganism or chemical agents can under appropriate circumstances become antigens.
Applied research experimental or theoretical work directed towards the application of scientific knowledge for the development, production or utilization of some useful product or capability.
Bacteriophage (phage) a virus that attacks or colonizes a bacterium. Bacteriophages are specific; one type of phage will attack only one species of bacteria.
Basic research experimental or theoretical work that is undertaken to acquire knowledge of fundamental principles of phenomena and observable facts and that may not be directed towards a specific application.
Biodegradation the natural process whereby rnicroorganisms break down organic molecules.
Biodiversity the totality of the world's life forms, ecosystems, and ecological processes, which can be characterized at the genetic, taxon (for instance, families and species), and ecosystem levels.
Bioremediation a technology that uses biological activity to treat contaminated soil or water in order to reduce or eliminate the contaminant(s) .
Biosafety in activities involving life forms or their parts, the observance of precautions and preventive procedures that reduce the risk of adverse effects.
Biotechnology a collection of processes and techniques that involve the use of living organisms, or substances from those organisms, to make or modify products from raw materials for agricultural, industrial or medical purposes.
Bivalve one of a class of sessile or burrowing mollusks, including clams, mussels and oysters.
Capability the ability to produce or apply a particular set of scientific techniques or technologies.
Catabolism see metabolism.
Catalyst a substance that affects the rate of a chemical reaction but remains itself unaltered in form or amount.
Cell culture the propagation of cells removed from a plant or animal in culture.
Cell fusion combining nuclei and cytoplasm from two or more different cells to form a single hybrid cell.
Clone a group of genetically identical cells or organisms asexually descended from a common ancestor. In a cloned organism, all cells making up that organism have the same genetic material and are exact copies of the original.
Cloning the use of genetic engineering to produce multiple copies of a single gene or a segment of DNA.
Crustacean one of the class Crustacea, which breathe by gills and whose bodies are covered by shell or crust, including barnacles, crabs, lobster and shrimp.
Culture the growth of cells or microorganisms in a controlled artificial environment.
Dispersant a substance that reduces surface tension of a floating pollutant, causing it to sink.
Database a collection of data, de&cd for one or more applications, which is physically located and maintained within one or more electronic computers.
Development the process of applying scientific and technical knowledge to the practical realization or enhancement of a specific product or capability.
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid; the carrier of genetic information found in all living organisms (except for a small group of RNA viruses). Every inherited characteristic is coded somewhere in an organism's complement of DNA.
Emulsant a surface-active substance that allows a normally immiscible liquid (for example oil) to disperse or become mixed into a second liquid (for example water).
Enzyme a special protein produced by cells that catalyze the chemical processes of life.
Escherichia cold (E. coli) a species of bacteria that commonly inhabits the human lower intestine and the intestinal tract of moat other vertebrates as wolf. Some strains are pathogenic, causing urinary tract infections and diarrheal diseases. Weakened strains are often used in laboratory experiments.
Expression the translation of a gene's DNA sequence by RNA into protein.
Fermentation the anaerobic bioprocess in which yeasts, bacteria or molds are used to convert a raw material into products such as alcohols, acids or cheeses.
Filterfeeder an organism that obtains its food by straining water passing through some part of its body and recovering suspended organisms. Filterfeeders include baleen whales, corals, mussels and sponges.
Finfish true fish, as opposed to shellfish.
Fraction a chemical agent or compound that may be separated out by chemical or physical methods from a solvent containing a mix of substances.
Gene the fundamental unit of heredity. Chemically a gene consists of ordered nucleotides that code for a specific product or control a specific function.
Gene splicing the we of site specific enzymes that cleave and reform chemical bonds in DNA to create modified DNA sequences.
Genetic engineering a collection of techniques wed to alter the hereditary apparatus of a living cell enabling it to produce more or different chemicals. These techniques include chemical synthesis of genes, the creation of recombinant DNA or recombinant RNA, cell fusion, plasmid transfer, transformation, transfection and transduction.
Halophilic tolerant of high concentrations of salt.
Hazard tho likelihood that an agent or substance will cause immediate or short-term adverse effects or injury under ordinary circumstances of we.
Host a cell whose metabolism is wed for growth and reproduction of a virus, plasmid, or other form of foreign DNA.
Host-vector system compatible host/voctor combinations that may be used for the stable introduction of foreign DNA into host cells.
Hybridoma a special cell produced by joining a tumor cell (myeloma) and an antibody producing cell (Iymphocyte). Cultured hybridoma produce large quantities a particular typo of monoclonal antibodies.
Hydrocarbon one of a large and diverse group of compounds, consisting of only carbon and hydrogen, constituting petroleum.
Infection the invasion and settling of a pathogen within a host.
Intellectual property the area of law encompassing patents, trademarks, trade secrets, copyrights, and plant variety protection.
In vitro literally "in glass.; pertaining to biological processes or reactions taking place in an artificial environment, usually the laboratory.
In vivo literally "in the living.; pertaining to biological processes or reactions taking place in a living system such as a cell or tissue.
Metabolism the sum of the chemical and physiological processes in a living organism in which foodstuff are synthesized into complex biochemicals (anabolism); complex biochemicals transformed into simple chemicals (catabolism), and energy is made available for the organism to function and procreate.
Metabolite a substance vital to the metabolism of a certain organism, or a product of metabolism.
Microinjection the injection of DNA into a cell or cell nucleus using a fine needle under a microscope.
Microorganism a microscopic living entity that can be a virus, bacterium, or fungus.
Mollusc invertebrate member of the phylum Mollusca, including clams, mussels octopuses, snails and squids.
Monoclonal antibody an antibody produced by a hybridoms that recognizes only a specific antigen.
Nucleotide the fundamental molecule that makes up DNA and RNA. Each nucleotide constituting DNA consists of one of four amino acids (adenine, guanine, cytosine or thymine) linked to tho phosphate-sugar group deoxyribose; each nucleotide constituting RNA consists of one of four amino acids (adenine, guanine cytosine or uracil) linked to tho phosphate-sugar group ribose.
Pathogen an organism that causes disease.
Plankton microscopic organisms inhabiting sea water in high numbers. Plankton may be phytoplankton (microscopic plants) or zooplankton (microscopic animals).
Plasmid small, circular, self-replicating forms of DNA often used in rDNA experiments as acceptors of foreign DNA.
Plasmid transfer tho use of genotic or physical manipulation to introduce a foreign plasmid into a host cell.
Production tho conversion of raw materials into products or components thereof through a serial of manufacturing processes.
Real time a characteristic of a system which makes information available about a process so quickly it allows tho operator to act to change the outcome of the process while it is still under way.
Recombinant DNA (rDNA) tho hybrid DNA resulting from the joining pieces of DNA from different sources.
Risk the probability of injury, disease or death for persons or groups of persons undertaking certain activitiea or exposed to hazardous substances. Risk is sometimes expressed in numeric teens (in fractions) or qualitative teens (low, moderate or high).
Risk management tho process of determining whether or how much to reduce risk through regulatory action. Decisions usually depend on data from risk assesment and take into account economic, ethical, legal, political and social factors.
RNA ribonucleic acid; fount in three formsmessenger, transfer and ribosomal RNA. RNA assists in translating tho genetic code of a DNA sequence into its complementary protein.
Shellfish an indistinct term for marine invertebrates, but commonly refers to any crustacean or mollusc.
Synthesis tho production of a compound by a living organism.
Technology tho scientific and technical information, coupled with know-how, that is used to design, produce and manufacture products or generate data.
Toxicity tho quality of being poisonous or tho degree to which a substance is poisonous.
Trait a characteristic that is coded for in tho organism's DNA.
Transduction the transfer of one or more genes from one bacteria to another by a bacteriophage (a virus that infects bacteria).
Transfection the process in which a bacterium is modified in a way that allows tho cell to take up purified, intact viral or plasmid DNA.
Transformation the introduction of new genetic information into a coil wing naked DNA (that is, without using a vector).
Triploid having three haploid sots of chromosomes in each nucleus.
Vector a transmission agent, usually a plasmid or virus, used to introduce foreign DNA into a host cell.
Virus an infectious agent, containing either DNA or RNA as its genetic material, which requires a host cell for its replication.
Wild-type an organism that is native to a locale in nature.
<section>References</section>
Agellon, L.B., C.J. Emery, J.M. Jones, S.L. Davies, A.D. Dingle and T.T. Chen. 1988. Promotion of rapid growth of rainbow trout Salmo gairdneri by a recombinant fish growth hormone. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 45:146-151.
Allen, S.K. Jr. 1988. Triploid oysters ensure yearround supply. Oceanus, 31(3):58-63.
Alper, J. 1990. Oases in the oceanic desert. ASM News 56(10):536-538.
Ansley, D. 1990. Cancer institute turns to cell line screening. The Scientist 4:3.
Austin, B. 1989. Novel pharmaceutical compounds from marine bacteria. Journal of Applied Bacteriology 67:461-470.
Bailey, C. 1988. The social consequences of tropical shrimp mariculture development. Ocean & Shoreline Management 11:31-44.
Baker, R.N. 1991. Remote sensing of oil in the marine environment: Stab-of-the art and future directions. European Science News Information Bulletin 7:A1-A7.
Baslow, M.H. 1977. Marine Pharmacology, Huntington, N.Y.: Robert E. Krieger Publishing Company.
Benemann, J.R. 1989. Microalgae products and production: An overview. In G.E. Pierce, ea., Developments in Industrial Biotechnology, Volume 31, 247-256. New York: Elsevier.
Bialy, H. 1992. From the green to the green revolution: Biotechnology and the international centers. Bio/technology 9:900.
Bjurstrom, E. E. 1 985 . Biotechnology: Fermentation and downstream processing. Chemical Engineering 92:126-158.
Board on Science and Technology for International Development (BOSTID). 1990. Saline Agriculture: Salt-Tolerant Plants for Developing Countries. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
.1982. Priorities in Biotechnology Research for International Development: Proceedings of a Workshop. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
Brown, L.M., Dunahay, T.G. & Jarvis, E.E.
1989. Applications of genetics to microalgae production. In G.E. Pierce, ea., Developments in Industrial Biotechnology, Volume 31, 271274. New York: Elsevier.
Bull, A.T., G. Holt and M.D. Lilly. 1982. Biotechnology: International Trends and Perspectives. Paris: Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development.
Callegari, J-P. 1989. Feu vert pour les microalgues. Biofutur No. 76:25-40.
Cardellina II, J.H. 1986. Marine natural products as leads to new pharmaceutical and agrochernical agents. Pure and Applied Chemistry 58(3): 365-374.
Carlton, J.T. 1989. Man's role in changing the face of the ocean: Biological invasion and implications for conservation of near-shore environments. Conservation Biology 33:265273.
Cell Tak and Matrigel. 1990. Trends in Biotechnology 8(10):v.
Center for Marine Science Research (CMSR). 1990. Annual Report --July 1989 to July 1990, University of North Carolina at Wilmington: Marine Biotechnology Program, Center for Marine Research.
Chapman, D .J. and K. W. Gellenbeck. 1 9 89 . An historical perspective of algal biotechnology. In: Algal and Cyanobacterial Biotechnology, 1-27. New York: Wiley.
Chen, T.T. and D.A. Powers. 1990. Transgenic fish. Trends in Biotechnology. 8(8):209-215.
Chowdhury, J. 1992. The rise of a dirty business. Chemical Engineering 98(11):44aa-44klc.
Cohen, S.N., A.C.Y. Chang, H.W. Boyer and R.B. Helling. 1973. Construction of biologically functional bacterial plasrnids in vitro. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 70:3240-3244.
Colwell, R.R. 1986. Marine Biotechnology and the Developing Countries, UNIDO report IS. 593, January 7.
Cooksey, K.E. 1991. The fifth European Congress on Biotechnology: Marine biotechnology. European Science News
Informatlon Buletin No. 91-02:36-37.
Costa-Pierce, B.A. 1987. Aquaculture in ancient Hawaii. BioScience 37(5):320-331.
Costerton, W. and H.M. Lappin-Scott. 1989. Behavior of bacteria in biofilms. ASM News 55:650-654..
Couve, Andrés. 1992. Interview with Chile's Fisheries Under Secretary Andrés Couve on February 15 d 10:00 GMT. Santiago Radio Chilena Network.
Crews, P. 1991. Personal communication, July 29.
Csavas, I. 1989. Recent development in coastal aquaculture in the Asia-Pacific. INFOFISH International No. 4:47-51.
Curtin, M.E. 1985. Trying to solve the biofouling problem. Bio/technology 3:38.
Cutler, A.J., M. Saleem and F. Georges. 1989. Can fish antifreeze proteins make frost resistant plants? Plant Biotechnology Institute Bulletin, July:1-3.
DNAP plants, yeast express flounder antifreeze. 1991. McGraw-Hill's Biotechnology Newswatch 11(9):2.
Edwards, P. 1991. Integrated fish farming. INFOFISH International No. S:45-51.
Engleking, H.M. and J.C. Leong. 1991. Subunit vaccine trials using glycoprotein and nucleoprotein constructs of the rhabdovirus, Infectious Hematopoietic Necrosis virus. In: 14th Annual AFS/FHS Meeting; 32nd Western Fish Disease Conference,, 45,. July 31 August 3, Newport, Oregon, OSU/Hatfield Marine Science Center.
Ferdouse, F. 1990. Sbrimp from China. INFOFISH International No. 3:24-26.
Fernandez-Pato, C. 1989. Mariculture developments; environmental effects and planning. Ocean & Shoreline Management 12:487-494.
First r-DNA 'clean-up bugs' to seek EPA fieldrelease OK. 1991. McGraw-Hill's ' Biotechnology Newswatch 11(11):1-3.
Five-year rod tide control campaign to begin (in Japanese). 1990. Kagaku Kogyo Nippo Tokyo. January 22:11.
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO). 1991. Aquaculture. Rome: FAO.
1989. Review of developments in aquaculture. INFOFISH International No. 4:34-40.
Fox, J.L. 1982. Complex structure of marine toxin unraveled. Chemical & Engineering News 60:19-20.
Gain for fish farmers. 1991. New York Times. November 19:29.
Gellenbeck, K.W. and D.J. Chapman. 1983. Seaweed uses: the outlook for mariculture. Endeavour 71:31-37.
Glenn, E.P., J.W. O'Leary, M.C. Watson, T.L. Thompson and R.O. Kuehl. 1991. Salicornia bigelovii Torr.: An oilseed halophyte for seawater irrigation. Science 251:1065-1067.
Gold, B.D. and E.B. Shultz, Jr. 1986. Marine biofuel for rural coastal and island communities in developing nations. In J. Twidell, I. Hounan and C. Lewis, ode, Energy for Rural and Island Communities IV, 87-92. New York: Pergamon Press.
Gotfrit, C.W. 1990. Salmon farming in Chile: from reality to dreams? INFOFISH International No. 1:40 43.
Gourlie, B., Lin, Y., Price, J., DeVries, A.L., Powers, D. and R.C. Huang. 1984. Winter flounder antifreeze proteins: A multigene family. Journal of Biological Chemistry 259:14960.
Grassle, J.F. 1991. Deep sea benthic biodiversity. BioScience 41(7):464-469.
Guerrero III, R.D. 1991. Farming tilapia in tho Philippines. INFOFISH International No. 6:4042.
Hadwiger, L.A. 1988. Crustacean shells may aid diseased farm crops. Oceanus 31(3):73.
Harvey, S., I. Elashvili, J.J. Valdes, D. Kamely and A.M. Chakrabarty. 1990. Enhanced removal of Exxon Valdez spilled oil from Alaskan gravel by a microbial surfactant. Bio/technology 8:228-230.
Heyward, A.J. and L.S. Hammond. 1990. Biotechnology for aquaculture. INFOFISH International No. 6:48-S1.
Hightower, L.E. and J.L. Renfro. 1988. Recent applications of fish cell culture to biomedical research. Journal of Experimental Zoology 248:290-302.
Hoffman, J. 1990. Provesta forms marine biology company. Chemical Marketing Reporter 238(22):27.
Huglen, O. 1991. Technologies for marine environmental surveillance Marine Industrial Technology Monitor No. 3:1-5.
Huss, H.H. 1991. Public health aspects of seafood consumption. INFOFlSH lnternational No. 3:27-32.
Initiative for the Accelerated Transfer of Biotechnology so the Ocean Sciences 1990. Washington D.C.: Joint Oceanographic Institutions Incorporated
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology ICGEB). 1990. Activity Report - 1990. Trieste ICGEB,
Jackson, D.A., R.H. Symons and P. Borg. 1972. Biochemical method for inserting DOW genotic information into DNA of simian virus 40: Circular SV40 DNA molecules containing lambda phage genes and tho galactose operon of Escherichia coli.. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 69:2904-2909.
Japan roundup. 1991. Bio/technology 9:130.
Josupeit, H. 1991. Sponges - world production and trade.. INFOFISH International No. 2:21-27.
Kant, A. 1991. Opportunities in India's marine sector. INFOFISH International No. 1:2429.
Kapucinski, A.R. 1990. Integration of transgenic fish into aquaculture. Food Reviews International 63:373-388.
Klausner, A. 1986. U.S. to screen marine or_ for drugs. Bio/technology 4:684.
1985. Food from tho sea. Bio/technology 3:27-32.
Köhler, a. and C. Milstein. 1975. Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined specificity. Nature 256:495-496.
Kornberg, A. 1991. Biotech nightmare: Does Cetus own PCR? Science 251:739.
Kullenberg, G. 1991. Personal communication, September 20.
Lessons from the golden snail. 1992. INFOFISH International, No. 1:33.
Limonta, M. 1989. Biotechnology and the Third World: Development strategies in Cuba. In B.R. Bloom and A. Cerami, oafs., Biomedical Science and the Third World. Under the Volcano 325-334. Now York: New York Academy of Sciences.
Liu Z., B. Moav, A.J. Pans, K.S. Guise, A.R. Kapucinski and P.B. Hackett. 1990.
Development of expression vectors for transgenic fish. Bio/technology 8:12681272.
Llana, E.G. 1991. Production and utilisation of seaweeds in tho Philippines. INFOFISH International No. 1: 12-17.
Lovatelli, A. 1990. Bivalves: statue, problems ant future in Asia. INFOFISH International No. 2:20-24.
Mabeau, S., O. Vallat and D. Brault. 1990. Do I'Orient a ['Occident: Les principaux marches. Biofutur No. 88:24-29.
Martello, A. 1991. Bioremediation: cleaning up with biology and technology. The Scientist 5(1): 18-19.
Masters, B.A. 1990. Algae is a growth industry for MD biotechnology company Washington Post, December 31:S.
McConnell, D., S. Riazuddin, R. Wu ant R.A. Zilinskas. 1986. Capability Building in Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering in Developing Countries, United Nations Industrial Development Organizations document UNIDO/IS. 608.
McCoy, H.D., II. 1990. Worldwide aquaculture production expected to double over next decade. Genetic Engineering News 10:1.
McElroy, S. 1990. Tho Japanese pearl market. INFOFISH International No. 6:17-23.
McGuire, J. 1992. Personal communication, February 28.
Metting, B. 1989. Microalgae applications in agriculture. In G.E. Pierce, ed., Development, in Industrial Biotechnology, Volume 31, 265-270. New York: Elsevier.
Miller, H.I., R.H. Burris, R.H. and A.K. Vidaver. 1991. Regulation of biotechnology (letter). Science 252:1599-1600.
More on the oyster project. 1992. INFOFISH International. No. 1:33.
Morgan, D. 1990. Two firms race to derive profits from mussels' glue. The Scientist, 4(9) 1.
Morse, A.N.C. 1991. How do planktonic larvae know where to settle? American Scientist 79: 154-167.
Morse, D.E. and A.N.C. Morse. 1988. Chemical signals and molecular mechanisms: Learning from larvae. Oceanus 31(3):3743.
National Research Council (NRC). 1990. Plant Biotechnology Research for Developing
Countries. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
1989. Field Testing Genetically Modified Organisms: Framework for Decisions. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
1985. Opportunities Marine Science and Technology for Developing Countries. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
Newkirk, G. 1991. The world of oyster culture: focus on Asia. INFOFISH International No. 6:43-46.
1989 FAO statistics. 1992. INFOFISH International. No. 2:8.
Noga, E.J. 1987. Propagation in cell culture of the dinoflagellate Amyloodinium, an ectoparasite of marine fishes. Science 236: 1302-1304.
Novitsky, T.J. 1984. Discovery to commercialization: The blood of the Horseshoe crab. Oceanus 27:13-26.
An ocean of viruses may affect global cycles. 1990. ASM News 56(12):632-633.
Office of Technology Assessment (OTA). 1991. Bioremediation for Marine Oil Spills. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
1984. Commercial Biotechnology: An International Analysis. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Olivera, B.M., J. Rivier, C. Clark, C.A. Ramilo, G.P. Corpuz, P.C. Abogadie, E.E. Mena, S.R. Woodward, D.R. Hillyard and L.J. Cruz. 1990. Diversity of Conus neuropeptides. Science 249:257-263.
Olson, B.H., R. McCleary and J. Meeker. 1991. Background and models for bacterial biofilms formation and function in water distribution systems. In C.l. Hurst, ea., Modeling the Environmental Fate of Microorganisms, 255285. Washington D.C.: American Society for Microbiology.
Peacock, F. 1991. Personal communication, April 15.
Pearls from freshwater mussels. 1992. INFOFISH International. No. 1:35.
Polne-Fuller, M., A. Rogerson and A. Gibor. 1991. Trichosphaerium 1-7, a marine amoeba which digests polyethylene and "saran wrap". Paper presented at the Second International
Marine Biotechnology Conference, October 15, Baltimore, MD.
Polysaccharides with high added value. 1991. French Technology Survey. December/ January:3.
Portier, R.J. and S.l. Ahmed. 1988. A marine biotechnological approach for coastal and estuarine site remediation and pollution control. Marine Technology Society Journal 22(2):6-14.
Powers, D.A. 1990. Marine and freshwater biotechnology: A new frontier, (unpublished).
Practical course on genetically modified organisms. 1991. Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Monitor. No. 34:2-3.
Primavera, J.H. 1991. Intensive prawn farming in the Philippines: ecological, social, and economic implications. Ambio 20(1):28-33.
Proctor, L.M. and J.A. Fuhrman. 1990. Viral mortality of marine bacteria and cyanobacter. Nature 343:60-62.
Ragotzkie, Robert A. 1988. The Sea Grant concept - an introduction. Marine Technology Society Journal 22(2):2-5.
Rechnitz, G.A. 1988. Biosensors. Chemical Engineering News 66:24-36.
Record year for shrimp farming. 1992. INFOFISH International. No. 2:39.
Renn, D.W. 1991. Personal communication, December 6.
1990. Seaweeds and biotechnologinseparable companions. Hydrobiologia 204/205:7-13.
1986a. Marine algae biotechnology: Possibilities and realities. In Board on Science and Technology for International Development, ea., Workshop on Marine Algae Biotechnology: Summary Record, 5367. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
1986b. Uses of marine algae in biotechnology and industry. In Board on Science and Technology for International Development, ea., Workshop on Marine Algae Biotechnology: Summary Report, 1629. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
Richards-Rajadurai, N. 1990. Carrageenanmultipurpose gum from the sea. INFOFISH International No. 5:18-22.
Robinson, P. K. 1985. Phycotechnology. Industrial Biotechnology 42(5):73-78.
Rodrigue, D.C., R.A. Etzel, E. Porras, O.H. Velasquez, R.V. Tauxe, E.M. Kilbourne and P.A. Blake. 1990. Lethal paralytic shellfish poisoning in Guatemala. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 42(3):267271.
Rojas, H. 1991. Waste contaminates marine products (in Spanish). El Mercurio Santiago, A1. May 2.
Ruying, S. and W. Qinguin. 1992. Laminaria culture in China. INFOFISH International No. 1:4043.
Sasson, A. 1988. Biotechnologies and Development, Paris: UNESCO.
Scheuer, P.J. 1990. Some marine ecological phenomena: Chemical basis and biomedical potential. Science 248:173-177.
Seaweed for the desert. 1991. UNISTAR Briefs, 2.
Selwood, T. 1992. Barramundi skin. INFOFISH International No. 1 :26-28.
Shang, Y.C. 1991. Sponge farming in Micronesia: Some economic aspects. INFOFISH International No. 2:4244.
Shariff, M. and R. Subasinghe. 1990. Health aspects of Asian aquaculture. INFOFISH International No. 5:35-38.
Sindermann, C.J. 1986. Strategies for reducing risks from introduction of aquatic organisms: A marine perspective. Fisheries 11(2):10-15.
Singh, T. 1991. Malaysia enjoys the seabass boom. INFOFISH International No. 2:45-48.
Singleton, F.L. and J.G. Kramer. 1991. Biotechnology of marine algae: Opportunities for developing countries. Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Monitor No. 25:83-90.
Smith, A.C. 1988. Marine animals: Clear models for medical science. The Scientist 2:18-19.
Stone, W.H. 1987. Defining biotechnology (letter). Bio/technology 5:1339.
Suttle, C.A., A.M. Chan and M.T. Cottrell. 1990. Infection of phytoplankton by viruses and reduction of primary productivity. Nature 347:467-469.
Swaminathan, M.S., ed. 1991. Biotechnology: Reaching the Unreached, Madras, India: Center for Research on Sustainable Agricultural and Rural Development.
Taylhardat, A. R. 1989a. The ICGEB: A center of excellence Part I. Biofutur No. 77:45-49.
Taylhardat, A. R. 1989b. The ICGEB: A center of excellence Part II. Biofutur No. 79:53-59.
Technical Q&A. 1991a. INFOFlSH lnternational No. 6:59-60.
Technical Q&A. 1991b. INFOFISH International No. 5:69-70.
Thermostable DNA polymerase. 1990. Trends in Biotechnology 8(10):v.
Thorne-Miller, B. and J.G. Catena. 1991. The Living Ocean: Understanding and Protecting Marine Biodiversity, Washington D. C.: Island Press.
Transgenic fish experiment gets green light. 1990. Biotechnology Notes 3(10): 1-2.
Trigo, E.J. and W. Jaffe. 1990. Biosafety regulations in the developing countries. Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Monitor No. 30:46-52.
Tucker, J.B. 1985. Biotechnology goes to sea. High Technology 5:3444.
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development(UNCED).1991. Biotechnology: Options for Agenda 21. Report of the Secretary-Ceneral of the Conference, Document #A/CONF.151 /PC/ 42/Add.5, July 9.
1992. Environmentally sound management of biotechnology. In Agenda 21 (Chapter 16).
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 1989. Plant Biotechnology including Tissue Culture and Cell Culture, New York: UNDP.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 1991. UNEP-Sponsored Programme for the Protection of Oceans and Coastal Areas, UNEP Regional Seas Reports and Studies No. 135.
1990. GESAMP: The State of the Marine Environment, UNEP Regional Seas Reports and Studies No. 115.
United Nations Industrial Development Organization(UNIDO). 1991. Voluntary Code of Conduct for the Release of Organisms Into the Environment, Vienna: UNIDO.
1981. Exchange of Views with Experts on the Implications of the Advances in Genetic Engineering for Developing Countries, UNIDO document IS. 259.
Updegraff, D.M. 1991. Background and practical applications of microbial ecology. In C.J. Hurst, ea., Modeling the Environmental Fate of Microorganisms, 1-20. Washington D.C.: American Society for Microbiology.
Vining, L.C. 1991. Functions of secondary metabolites. Annual Review of Microbiology 44:395-427.
Weiner, J. 1985. Marine biotech in the Negev desert. Bio/technology 3:39.
Weiss Jr., C. 1985. The World Bank's support for science and technology. Science 227:261265.
Welcomme, R.L. 1986. International measures for the control of introductions of aquatic organisms. Fisheries 11(2):4-9.
World Bank. 1992. The World Bank Annual Report 1991. Washington, D.C.
1991 la. Agricultural Biotechnology: The Next "Green Revolution.?. Technical Paper No. 133. Washington, D.C.
1991b. Fisheries and Aquaculture Research Capabilities and Needs in Asia. Technical Paper Number 147. Washington, D.C.
Wu, R. 1986. Building biotechnology research and development capability in developing countries. In Capability Building in Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering in Developing Countries, 61-75. United Nations Industrial Development Organization document # UNIDO/IS.608.
Yaoqing, J. and C. Xiongfeng. 1990. Study on antifreeze protein in fishes. II. The cloning of antifreeze protein gene cDNA of Pseudopleuro-nectes yokohamae and its expression in E. cold (in Chinese). Yichuan Xuebao [ACTA Genetica Sinica] 17(3):202210.
Yap, W.G. 1990. Backyard hatcheries take off in Jepara. INFOFISH lnternational, No. 2:4247.
Zilinskas, R.A. 1993. Bridging the gap between research and applications in the Third World. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 9(2):145-152.
1989. Biotechnology and the Third World: The missing link between research and applications. Genome 31(2): 1046-1054.
<section>Recent World Bank Discussion Papers</section>
No. 189 Poverty, Population, and the Environment. Stephen D. Mink
No. 190 Natural Gas in Developing Countries Evaluating the Benefits to the Environment. John Homer
No. 191 Appropriate Macroeconomic Management in Indonesia Open Economy. Sadio Ahmed
No. 192 Telecommunications: World Bank Experience and Strategy. Bjorn Wellenius and others
No. 193 Information Systems Strategies for Public Financial Management. Hywel M. Davies, Ali
Hashim, and Eduardo Talero
No. 194 Social Gains from Female Education A Cross-National Study. K. Subbarao and Laura Raney
No. 195 Towards a Sustainable Development: The Rio de Janeiro Study. Edited by Alcira Kreimer, Thereza Lobo, Braz Menezes, Mohan Munasinghe, and Ronald Parker
No. 196 Eastern Europe in Transition: From Recession to Growth? Proceedings of a Conference on the Macroeconomic Aspects of Adjustment, Cosponsored by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Edited by Mario I. Blejer, Guillermo A. Calvo, Fabrizio Coriceili, and Alan H. Gelb
No. 197 Korean Industrial Policy Legacies of the Past and Directions for the Future. Danny M. Leipziger and Peter A. Petri
No. 198 Exporting High- Value Food Commodities: Success Stories from Developing Countries. Steven M. Jaffee with the assistance of Peter Cordon
No. 199 Borrower Ownership of A Adjustment Programs and the Political Economy of Reform. John H. Johnson and Sulaiman S. Wasty
No. 200 Social Infrastructure Construction in the Sahel: Options for Improving Current Practices. Bernard Abeillé and JeanMarie Lantran
No. 201 Urbanization, Agricultural Development, and Land Allocation. Dipasis Bhadra and Antonio Salazar P. Brandao
No. 202 Making Motherhood Safe. Anne Tinker and Marjorie A. Koblinsky
No. 203 Poverty Reduction in East Asia: The Silent Revolution. Frida Johansen
No. 204 Managing the Civil Service: The Lessons of Reform in Industrial Countries. Barbara Nunberg
No. 205 Designing a System of Labor Market Statistics and Information. Robert S. Goldfarb and Arvil V. Adams
No. 206 Information Technology in World Bank Lending: Increasing the Developmental Impact. Nagy Hanna and Sandor Boyson
No. 207 Proceedings of a Conference on Currency Substitution and Currency Boards. Edited by Nissan Liviatan
No. 208 Developing Effective Employment Services. David Fretwell and Susan Goldberg
No. 209 Evolving Legal Frameswrks for Private Sector Development in Central and Eastern Europe. Cheryl W. Gray and Associates
No. 210 Marine Biotechlology and Developing Countries. Raymond A. Zilinskas and Carl Gustaf Lundin
No. 211 Revitalizing Agricultural Research in the Sahel: A Proposed Framework for Action Jan Weijenberg, Jesué Dioné, Michael Fuchs-Carsch, Adolphe Kéré, end Jacques Lefort
No. 212 Institutional Options for the Provision of Infrastructure Christine Kessides
No. 213 The Contributions of Infrastructure to Economic Development: A Review of Experience and Political Implications. Christine Kessides
No. 214 From Macroeconomic Correction to Public Sector Reform: The Critical Role of Evaluation. Eduardo Wiesner D.
No. 215 China: Reform and Development in 1992-93. Peter Harrold and Rajiv Lall
No. 216 The Reform of Public Expenditures for Agriculture. Bonni van Blarcom, Odin Knudsen, and John Nash
No. 217 Managing Fishery Resources: Proceedings of a Symposium Co-Sponsored by tire World Bank and Peruvian Ministry of Fisheries held in Lima, Peru, June 1992. Eduardo A. Loayza
No. 218 Cooperatives and the Breakup of Large Mechanized Farms: Theoretical Perspectives and Empirical Evidence . Klaus W.
Deininger
No. 219 Development of Rural financial Markets in Sub-Saharan Africa. Sabapathy Thillairajah
No. 220 The Maritime Transport Crisis. Hans J. Peters
No. 221 Policy-Based-Finance: The Experience of Postwar Japan. The Japanese Development Hank and The Japan Economic
Research Institute
No. 222 Macroeconomic Management in China: Proceedings of a Conference in Dalian, June 1993. Edited by Peter Harrold, E. C. Hwa, and Lou Jiwei
No. 223 The Development of the Private Sector in a Small Economy in Transition The Case of Mongolia. Hongjoo Hahm
No. 224 Toward an Environmental Strategy for Asia. Carter Brandon and Ramesh Ramankutty
No. 225 "Fortress Europe " and Other Myths about Trade: Policies toward Merchandise Imports in tire EC and Other Major Industrial Economies (and What They Mean for Developing Countries). Jean Baneth
No. 226 Mongolia: Financing Education during Economic Transition. Kin Bing Wu
No. 227 Cities without Land Markets: Lessons of the Failed Socialist Experiment. Alain Bertaud and Bertrand Renaud
No. 228 Portfolio Investment in Developing Countries. Edited by Stijn Claessens and Sudarshan Gooptu
No. 229 An Assessment of Vulnerable Groups in Mongolia: Strategies for Social Policy, Planning. Caroline Harper
No. 230 Raising the Productivity of Women Fanners in Sub-Saharan Africa. Katrine Saito
No. 231 Agricultural Extension in Africa. Aruna Bagchee
No. 232 Telecommunications Sector Reform in Asia: Toward a New Pragmatism. Peter L. Smith and Gregory Staple
No. 233 Land Reform and Farm Restructuring in Russia. Karen Brooks and Zvi Lerman
No. 234 Population Growth, Shifting Cultivation, and Unsustainable Agricultural Development: A Case Study in Madagascar. Andrew Keck, Narendra P. Sharma, and Gershon Feder
No. 235 The Design and Administration of Intergovernmental Transfers: Fiscal Decentralization in Latin America. Donald R. Winkler
No. 236 Public and Private Agria/ltural Extension Beyond Traditional Frontiers. Dina L. Umali and Lisa Schwartz
No. 237 Indonesian Experience with Financial Sector Reform. Donald P. Hanna
No. 238 Pesticide Policies in Developing Countries: Do They Encourage Excessive Use? Jumanah Farah
No. 239 Intergovernment Fiscal Relations in Indonesia: Issues and Reform Options. Anwar Shah and Zia Qureshi
No. 240 Managing Redundancy in Overexploited Fisheries. Joshua John
No. 241 Institutional Change and the Public Sector in Transitional Economies. Salvatore Schiavo-Campo
No. 242 Africa Can Compete!: Export Opportunities and Challenges for Garments and Home Products inn the U.S. Market. Tyler Biggs, Gail R. Moody, Jan-Hendrik van Leeuwen, and E. Diane White
No. 243 Liberalizing Trade in Services. Bernard Hoekman and Pierre Sauvé
No. 244 Women in Higher Education: Progress, Constraints, and Promising Initiatives. K. Subbarao, Laura Raney, Halil Dundar, and Jennifer Haworth
No. 245 What We Know About Acquisition of Adult Literacy: Is There Hope? Helen Abadzi
<section>The World Bank</section>
Headquarters 1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 477-1234
Facsimile: (202) 477-6391
Telex: MCI 64145 WORLDBANK
MCI 248423 WORLDBANK
Cable Address: INTBAFRAD
WASHINGTONDC
European Office 66, avenue d'léna 75116 Pans, France
Telephone: (1) 40.69.30.00 Facsimile: (1) 40.69.30.66 Telex: 640651
Tokyo Office
Kokusai Building
1-1 Marunouchi 3-chome
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100, Japan
Telephone: (3) 3214-5001
Facsimile: (3) 3214-3657
Telex: 26838
