<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
There is sufficient evidence that there is a quiet and strong surge of energy happening among rural women in the past decade. As women organize themselves into self-help groups, they are quietly but surely regaining their self-worth. Their families and their communities cannot help but notice this process of breaking through barriers which have been there for centuries. Rural women speak of this process of breaking through in various symbolic and sometimes poetic ways. " It is good to see the sun once more ... "... "We are getting stronger like the oxen we tend... " " If felt I was in a deep well, and after training I have been able to see the sun and have found the steps to climb out.... "
As change agents we have witnessed some of this process of breaking through - rural women's emergence from the shackles of poverty. It is perhaps one of the purest joys of a change agent to be part of this process. These brave and creative women have transformed us as well. We have drawn strength and wisdom from them.
This Manual in many ways is the story of their lives. We have documented a process and designed tools which these rural women said helped them. The organization, the write-up may be familiar to those who work in similar fields, but the soul and the spirit of what this Manual contains belong to the many rural women not only in China but those in Indonesia, Thailand, Philippines, Vietnam, Cambodia, Nepal, Bangladesh and Pakistan, who taught us what it means... really means to break through barriers.
It is our hope that this Manual will find resonance in others who have grappled with approaches to articulate rural women's own process of emergence to self-empowerment.
Our most sincere appreciation is hereby expressed to Mr. Jacques du Guerny. Chief, Population Programme Service (SDWP), FAO, Rome, for his continuing technical guidance in this WPD work.
Felicidad L. Villareal
FAO Population and Rural Development Adviser
Beijing, China
March 26, 1995
<title>Breaking through - A manual for field workers and rural women on group formation</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
The development and testing of this Manual owes much to many people in many countries. Firstly, we acknowledge with deep gratitude the many rural women who inspired and taught us in China, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines, Vietnam, Cambodia, Nepal, Bangladesh and Pakistan. Secondly, we are indebted to the field workers and supervisors of the above countries who have provided us not only with insights but have inspired us with their dedication and perseverance. Thirdly, there are individuals who have helped us in the conceptualization, testing, revisions and finalization of this Manual. They are the following:
Aris Alip, who helped us during the conceptualization stage and in the structuring of the workshop design;
The Capiz Province "Women Population and Development" Staff especially Lolit Villareal, Connie Fagtanan and Anna Leal who allowed us to use their province as a social laboratory and for sharing their experiences with the initial group of Core Trainers from China;
Cora Bakker who provided critical and useful comments on the design;
The Core Trainers in China, especially Chen Xiufang Shi Luzhang, Yan Guifan, who especially at the testing period were most helpful in their comments and in consolidating the results of the testing;
Ma Yong for his patient translations from English to Chinese and vice versa during the testing period and the finalization of this Manual;
Song Jing for secretarial support.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Introduction
IMAGE
1. A Perspective
Each person regardless of background or life history has her own potential to achieve her own goals and aspirations in life. An affirmation of this belief and manifestation in one's life is what we call self-reliance.
People who have attained a level of self-reliance are productive and creative members of their family and community. They are resourceful and independent. Those who for some reason or other lack this essential ingredient for development, have become a part of what writers call a "dependency culture". They are caught in an endless downward spiral. They have a low image of themselves, are fearful of taking risks, are unable to use their potentials and creativity. As a consequence such individuals abdicate their basic rights in decision-making to others. Such individuals contribute meagerly to their household and community. Their contribution, are generally taken for granted by society in general.
The core objective of the "Women Population and Development" programme of China is to provide opportunities for rural poor women to achieve a certain level of self-reliance, in the belief that once women regain control on their lives they will be able to improve their general economic and social situation. As part of this process of attaining improved status as they revalidate themselves, among other things, they are able to rationalize their family life planning, particularly in the area of birth planning and general reproductive health and child care.
This Manual is one of the tools for rural women to address various issues related to lack of self-reliance on the one had and on exploring approaches for self-transformation towards self-reliance on the other hand.
2. Women Population and Development Manual Series
A series of Manuals has been developed within the context of the Women Population and Development (WPD) programme of China. This Manual on "Group Formation for Rural Women" is one of these. One Manual builds on the other and should therefore be used in conjunction with the others. Cross references are made where required.
Originally, this Manual on "Formation of Rural Women" has been designed for county and township personnel. During the testing period we have found that the Manual can be used by project personnel for rural women as well. The only adjustments project personnel had to make was in terms of pace rather than in presentation. They have had to take a slower pace with groups which had more illiterate members in the said group.
Another Manual on "Micro-enterprise Development" has been designed for county and township project personnel. The nature of the subject matter requires a certain level of education. This is used only for county and township personnel and/ or more advanced members of women's groups.
3. Manual Organization and the Workshop Process
There are four Modules in this Manual on "Group Formation of Rural Women". The first three Modules are used both for field workers workshop as well as for women's groups. There are two parts in Module 4. Module 4-F is for Field Workers and Module 4-W is for rural women's groups.
Module 1: The Role of Persons in Organization Building
This Module addresses issues related to value clarification and value change. Participants are given opportunities to address issues related to why women's status are low. They then determine the approaches to change their situation. Through socio-psychological techniques they are guided through the process of clarifying their own values regarding self-image, risk taking, self-expression etc. Also in this Module they address value issues related to establishing an organization, such as the importance of trust, cooperation and communication.
Module 2: Organizational Mechanics
Module 2 initiates participants into group organization as they are introduced mechanics of establishing and managing their own organization. Participants are guided through the establishment of a savings and loan operation as an essential discipline and financial foundation of an organization for self-reliance. Step by step they are guided as they evolve their group goals and objectives; Policies and Procedures; leadership styles suited to their voluntary and democratic organization; terms of reference for their organizational officers; mechanisms of control such as meeting procedures, minutes of meetings etc.
Modern techniques adapted from the body of knowledge made available through literature and practice in the field of "Organizational Development" are used in this Module. There is therefore a lot of group work with a requirement to accomplish outputs, which are not theoretical but are practical use by the group to start operating their organization right after the workshop.
Module 3: Basic Elements: Establishment and Maintenance of Micro-Enterprises
We have learned from the Women Population and Development project, that one of the main approaches to regain a certain level of self-reliance is for rural poor women to undertake their own individual micro-enterprise. In this Module the workshop participants are given an opportunity to learn basic knowledge and skills in the establishment and maintenance of micro-enterprises.
It may be noted however, that this Module requires a certain level of literacy skills and field workers are warned during their own training to adjust the material and pace to each specific group.
Module 4: Work Plan or Action Plan
Module 4 - F for field workers has three major parts namely: (a) knowledge and skills required in planning for the establishment of women's groups in their individual county areas; (b) the procedures and systems to be established in women's groups; (c) their own county Work Plan or Action Plan.
Module 4 - W for women's groups has two major parts namely: (a) a review of goals and objectives they developed earlier and the Organizational Development Framework (the latter giving indicative targets against key indicators); (b) their own Action Plan for 6 months.
4. The Educational Methodology
The fundamental belief of self-reliance is woven into all the features of this Manual. The learning process is structured in such a way as to draw out the ideas of participants. It is this essential principle of participation in the process of arriving at outputs which initiates and sustains the process of building the sense of self-reliance of the workshop participants. Participants are in effect introduced not only to a method but a value of participation which hopefully will carry through in the way they operate their organization.
Participants of the workshop are introduced to a participatory mode of learning as differentiated from the teacher-student mode of learning. In the former, the flow of knowledge which is the content of learning is drawn from the participants themselves. Being adults who have years of experiences, participants contribute content in the workshop. In the latter, the flow of knowledge or content of learning is mostly from the teacher to the student.
The Modules and what they contain are like building blocks. As such therefore, they are not independent of each other. They build on one another. It is for example not advisable to simply use Module 2 when participants have not had the opportunity to experience the learning process in Module 1.
Socio-psychological tools have been introduced, drawing from modern methods of education and corporate manpower development. In the process of testing the Manual on "Group Formation For Rural Women" we have been able to find the appropriate adjustments in the socio-psychological tools to fit local culture.
A deductive and/or experiential method of learning is employed. For example, an experiential activity is first undertaken. Participants are guided to undergo a Group Dynamics activity. They then discuss and reflect on what they have learned from this experience by transferring the principle to real life situation. The results of their discussions are then summarized and reflected back by the Facilitator to the group. Theory is used to enhance participant insights. This process in effect makes participants actually provide their own inputs and to delineate these from those of the Facilitator. The Facilitator enhances participant outputs by organizing their outputs, adding her own insights and enhancing the over-all group output through theoretical synthesis.
5. The Workshop Design
There are two phases in the workshop for field workers. This workshop is for a period of about 160 - 170 hours or 18 days with 8-9 hours work daily. of this two to three days are for field practice. There are therefore two phases in the workshop for field workers. The first phase is in-classroom and the second phase in the village, working with rural women.
The workshop for rural women is for a period of 60 - 70 hours. This could broken into segments, but basically Module 1 needs to be done within a continuous time frame.
See Figure 1 for the Workshop Design.
WORKSHOP DESIGN: GROUP FORMATION
(For Field Workers/Facilitators)
PHASE I: THEORETICAL PHASE
PHASE II: PRACTICUM PHASE
Topics
MODULE 1
The Rob of Persons in
Organization Building
MODULE 2
Organizational Mechanics
MODULE 3
Basic Elements in the
Establishment of a
Micro-Enterprise
Module 4-F
Work Planning
FIELD PRACTICUM
- Setting A Tone For Participation
- Situation Analysis
- Why Organize Ourselves
- The Importance of Persons In Organization Building
- Group Capital Fund and Project Revolving Fund Discussed
- Group Savings and Loan Operation as key foundation for self-reliance
- Group Capital Build Up
- The Revolving Fund
- Credit Management
- Goal Setting
- Objective Setting
- Organizational Struction/ Functioning
- Causes of Success or Failure of a Business
- My Business Plan
- Important Business Records
- Task Analysis
- Planning for Organizing Women's Groups
- Preparing for Systems required for Group Loans:
- Application- Financial System Establishment at Women's Groups
- Monitoring/Technical Assistance
- Organizational Enhancement
- The 6 Components-savings and Loan Operation; Micro Enterprise Operation; MCH/FP Education and Services; Functional Literacy Enhancement; Technical Skills Training; Folk Media.
- Preparation of Workshop Design
- Conduct of Workshop at Village Level
Process
Lecture/Sharing, Structured Learning Exercise (SLE), Workshop/Discussions, Rob Playing. Caselets
On the Job Actual Work
Output-
- An appreciation of the concept and practice in participatory learning/shared responsibility
- Workshop objectives and methodology understood and accepted
- Identified Roots, Indications, Consequences of Why Women hew Low Status
- Identified Approaches in Raising Women's Status
- Internalized the need to organize
- Internalized the importance of group savings and loan operation as key foundation for self-reliance
- Understood the Terms and Condition of the Project Revolving Fund
- Organized themselves with clear goals; objectives; organizational Structure; Officers elected; Group Policies and Procedures
- Internalized key factors which make business succeed or fail
- Each participant would have developed a rough draft of their individual Business Plans
- Gained knowledge and initial skills in keeping a Cash Record
- Clear understanding of FW task requirements for group formation
- FW internalized principles and procedures in disbursing group loans
- FW familiar with loan application procedures; financial records system and related forms;
- County Work Plan accomplished
-Practical Skills, Knowledge and Attitudes in Organizing Women's Groups acquired
- Evaluated/Provided Feed-on Participant's Performance as field workers/facilitators
Duration
19-20 Hours
10-15 Hours
15 Hours
10-12 Hours
2 Days
WORKSHOP DESIGN: GROUP FORMATION
(For Women's Groups)
PHASE I: THEORETICAL PHASE
MODULE 1
The Role of Persons in
Organization Building
MODULE 2
Organizational Mechanics
MODULE 3
Basic Elements in the
Establishment of a
Micro-Enterprise
Module 4-W
Action Planning
Topics
- Setting A Tone For Participation
- Situation Analysis
- Why Organize Ourselves
- The Importance of Persons In Organization Building
- Group Capital Fund and Project Revolving Fund Discussed
- Group Savings and Loan Operation as key foundation for self-reliance
- Group Capital Build-Up
- The Revolving Fund
- Credit Management
- Goal Setting
- Objective Setting
- Organizational Struction/ Functioning
- Causes of Success or Failure of a Business
- My Business Plan
- Important Business Records
- Review of Partnership Commitments and Programme Overview
- Review of Goals and Objectives
- Consideration of Organizational Development Framework
- Action Planning (6 months duration)
Process
Lecture/Sharing, Structured Learning Exercise (SLE). Workshop/Discussions, Role Playing. Caselets
Output
- An appreciation of the concept and practice in participatory learning/shared responsibility
- Workshop objectives and methodology understood and accepted
- Identified Roots, Indications Consequences of Why Women have Low Status
- Identified Approaches in Raising Women's Status
- Internalized the need to organize
- Internalized the importance of group savings and loan operation as key foundation for self-reliance
- Understood the Terms and Condition of the Project Revolving Fund
- Organized themselves with clear goals; objectives; organizational Structure; Officers elected; Group Policies and Procedures
- Internalized key factors which make business succeed or fail
- Each participant would have developed a rough draft of their individual Business Plans
- Gained knowledge and initial skills in keeping a Cash Record
- Clear understanding of group commitments; goals, objectives;
- Set targets in Organizational Development
- Action Plan for 6 months developed and committed to Workshop Synthesized
Duration
19-20 Hours
10-15 Hours
15 Hours
6 Hours
<section>3</section>
A note for facilitators
A note for facilitators
1. A Perspective
Knowledge of the subject matter and skills in communication are important. Just as important is the workshop Staffs' value with regard to their faith and trust in the potentials of the participants. This value needs to be communicated in their attitudes, words, actions and in all aspects of their conduct with the participants. The workshop Staff needs to see beyond the participants' lack of formal education or whatever other superficial limitations which may be apparent. They need to believe that life experience of participants are a rich source of knowledge and wisdom. It is this fundamental belief in the unique contribution of each person and the workshop staff's thorough preparations which can make a difference between success or failure of the workshop.
2. The Role of the Facilitator
The Facilitator within this context is not a "banker" who possess all the knowledge which she doles out or communicates to the participants. The Facilitator contributes her own experience and knowledge but she is not the only source. Each participant has a lot to contribute to the fund of knowledge of the group. The real "banker" therefore is the group. This "bank" will be solid to the extent that each one makes the most effort to build up this "fund" - and not just from one source.
The role of the Facilitator is not like that of a teacher. The teacher "banks" in knowledge she has to the students. Rather, the Facilitator manages various elements in the workshop process so that the wealth of knowledge from each of the participants can be shared by everyone. The Facilitator synthesizes what has been shared by participants and at a certain point makes her own contribution. She consciously underlines what has been the outputs of the group, separate from what she has added. In this way she gradually increases the sense of self-worth of the participants, as they see their own contribution in the workshop.
See Figure 2 for an illustration of the role of the Facilitator and the role of participants through stages of work.
3. The Role of the Workshop Monitors
Workshop Monitors (those who assist the Facilitator) as the title suggests, monitor the process of the workshop from afar. This is an important function in a workshop. The Facilitator is generally focused on the running of the activity and therefore cannot be aware of everything that goes on in the workshop room. The Monitors therefore need to be continuously attentive to what is going on in the workshop room. For example, monitors should be observing the level of participation. They can discretely encourage the shy ones. Monitors should sometimes remind the Facilitator about something which the latter may have missed, etc. Monitors should have extensive notes of what they think should be improved. These are discussed at the end of the day with the Facilitator during the workshop Staff Meeting.
4. The Use of Symbols and Illustrations
The use of symbols and illustrations is greatly encouraged. Symbols are used in three ways in this Manual.
First as a tool for imagination and creative thought. For example symbols are used in the self-introduction of participants. This requires the participants to think creatively rasher then just writing their names, occupation etc. Another important reason is that it promotes a sense of equality among those who are literate and those who are illiterate,
A second use of symbols in the Manual is in the illustration of complex concepts, such as the flow of a message from sender to receiver in the Activity on Communication. These symbols are then carried through in succeeding work as a tool for recalling the contents previously covered.
A third use of symbols in this Manual is as marker of the Facilitator's synthesis et the end of a Topic or Activity or Module.
5. Workshop Materials
Simple lines and curves are intentionally used for the symbols and illustrations such as drawing pottery. During the testing period we have found that workshop participants found it easy to draw.
The use of newsprint is encourage. We have found that because Facilitators are not presented with a "finished product" such as printed posters, etc. they have a stronger and deeper grasp of their material as they prepare their materials in newsprint. Furthermore, Facilitator's materials elicit participation from workshop participants as well as participants color or add something to what the Facilitators have prepared.
Opting for the use of newsprint instead of printed posters has been intentional based on the following reasons: (a) the workshop Staff are to study and prepare their material more thoroughly; (b) in writing on newsprint, the workshop Staff reinforce their grasp of the material; (c) these materials are used for several Activities within the workshop and therefore are not lost (materials are erased if one used the blackboard or transparency for example); (d) newsprint are available in remote counties/townships; (e) relatively cheap (compared to printed posters); (f) do not require electricity (if we used transparencies we need electricity); (g) the participants can refer to these newsprint when they do sub-group work.
6. Workshop Environment
Research has shown that the workshop environment plays an important role in facilitating learning. The more contact participants have with one another the more participation generally occurs. The more participation there is the more chances for internalization of important ideas. Value change can occur more easily for both the participants as well as for the Facilitator because what results is a more personal investment in the process of learning.
The workshop Staff needs to constantly remember that it is through personal investments that participants take the small but important steps in this process of self-empowerment. Every victory a women experiences against her self-imposed limitations is a step towards empowerment. Overcoming her shyness for example by speaking out her mind, and other succeeding small steps during the workshop are important building blocks in this process of self-empowerment or self-reliance.
Among the various important elements in establishing a facilitative environment are: (a) the room arrangement; (b) size of the groups; (c) Timing and Pacing; (d) Setting a culture of communication; (e) role of monitors.
Room Arrangement
During a workshop there could be different groupings for different purposes and room arrangement could be done according to the various purposes. For example at the beginning of the workshop, the Facilitator would need to explain the methodology and other related information which participants would need to understand. If the purpose is to provide information for all participants, the room arrangement could be made in such as way as to make sure that each participant would have a clear view of materials which the facilitator would be posting on the wall.
See Figure 3 for suggestions on how the room could be arranged for various purposes. These considerations could also be used for Orientation Meetings which the WPD project personnel generally undertake in the villages prior to the formal 60 - 70 hour workshop.
Group Size
Majority of people find it difficult to talk in a big group of strangers or even among people who know one another, if they do not have experience to speak in such situations. It is much more so for rural women who have no or but a few occasion to speak their minds or express their feelings. For example, illiterate women generally feel they have nothing to contribute in a discussion in spite of their long years of life experience. This is due to among other things, their own perception of themselves and reinforced by people in their society who have considered them inferior.
The determination of group size during the training process together with the provision of other structures could diminish the negative effect of the above influence. These group discussions and/or group work are critical settings where women start to build up their self confidence. It is also in this setting where they begin to discover their own potentials as well as those of others.
It has been our experience in the WPD project that the ideal group size for group discussion and/or group work is between 5-7 persons per group. This allows for each member to be able to participate fully. When groups are too large members of the group tend to depend on the more vocal ones and the creative process in group work could be affected negatively. In such a situation, participants would miss the small but important steps in building up their confidence and an opportunity for self discovery.
Timing and Pacing
Creative process within the group and substantial outputs of an Activity can occur if the Facilitator is skillfully facilitating the process where individuals in the group are able to make their contribution in group work or discussion. Effective timing and pacing is important to be able to do this.
Time is a precious resource. The Facilitator has therefore the responsibility to manage it effectively for and with the participants.
Managing appropriate timing as a tool to elicit creative thought and produce group output. Once time is allotted for an Activity, the Facilitator and the workshop group in effect have some kind of unwritten contract to fulfill the given activity within the time given. This means that time allotted to a given Activity is observed. At the same time the Facilitator needs to be sensitive to allowing for more time, if the group is in the midst of critical and important discussion. She warns the group from time to time to let them know how much more time is left to finish what they are doing.
In a situation where the group is sluggish and bored the Facilitator could stop the work or discussion. She focuses on the work atmosphere instead. This is discussed as a group so that lessons could be learned. After this short discussion on the climate or atmosphere in the group, they proceed to work or discuss the main Activity which they had left earlier.
Another important element which the Facilitator needs to be sensitive to is pacing. This consists in creating a balance of healthy tension and slack or comfort among participants. Time allocated for an exercise could be used as tool for tension as described above. A well timed joke could ease tension. But perhaps more than any other thing, the friendly attitude and conduct of the staff is that which provides a relaxed atmosphere for creative work. This balance between creative tension and a sense of comfort results in creative thinking and enthusiasm among participants.
Another consideration related to pacing is how the facilitator moves the work or discussion process from one stage to another. This means that Facilitator needs to be aware of when outputs from stage are accomplished so that she can move the next stage. For example, there are times when the time allocated for an Activity may be too long. This could mean that the participants want a slightly faster pace and the group could move on to another Activity. On the other hand it could be that the pace is too fast and participants feel that they are being rushed. Outputs could mean that participants are only trying to accomplish a requirement and not really internalizing what they have learned. In both cases (slow pace and fast pace) learning could suffer.. A balance is needed.
Village Folk Communication Culture
Writing and reading as communication forms are generally secondary tools for village folk. Oral and visual forms of communication are more attune to village culture. Research has shown that recall capacity (ability to remember) among those who are illiterate or semiliterate is much more heightened than those who use the written form. Only those who have had formal education are comfortable with the written form.
As Facilitators, we have an obligation to find the best way to communicate our ideas to the specific group of women when we work with them. Accepting the reality that village folk have a different (not inferior) communication culture is already the beginning for our search for the best medium of communication.
Adjust to Physical Conditions
These workshop sessions are generally held in village schools or someone's court yard in the village. At times there is no electricity. In many cases these sessions are held in winter time and there are no heating facilities in these village schools and courtyards. It is therefore important for the workshop Staff to acquaint themselves with the physical setting of the workshop so that they may anticipate the needed adjustments, such as the best time or length of sessions per day or night.
7. Feedback and Staff Meeting
Feedback sessions and Staff meetings are essential activities which could help assure qualitative outputs. These sessions are held every day - usually at night.
The Feedback Session
Facilitator solicits volunteers from among participants for a Feedback Session. The purpose of this discussion between the volunteers and the staff is so find ways on how to improve the workshop. This is one mechanism to make real what the workshop philosophy is shared responsibility between the workshop staff and the participants. These volunteers could serve for each activity or for one topic covered. Volunteers meet with the workshop Staff at the end of the day. Volunteers should take the perspective of the participants rather than just their own during this Feedback session. This session should not last more than 3045 minutes. Suggested Guide Questions for these sessions are the following:
(a) What have the participants learned ? Major ones?
(b) Which areas were unclear and why?
(c) Are they satisfied with the level of participation? If not why not?
(d) Are they satisfied with the learning atmosphere (do they perceive the workshop
Staff as helpful and friendly? Are they being rushed? Is the pace too slow? etc.)
(e) What improvements would they suggest to the workshop Staff in terms of:
 the learning process
 the over-all management of the workshop
 physical arrangements
 others
The Staff Meeting
The workshop staff meeting could also be called a "feedback session", since it is during this time that the workshop staff reflect on the work process. For terminology purposes to differentiate from the feedback session with the volunteer participants, we shall call this the Staff Meeting.
There are three objectives for this activity. The first is to determine how best to improve the way the workshop is being run. The second is to clarify various assignments for the next day of the workshop. It is during this meeting when the Workshop Team Leader assigns tasks as required. Assignments are discussed and should be clearly understood by everyone. The third is to improve the skills of the staff in analysis and problem-solving to find ways to improve the way they conduct the workshop. It may be noted that the first two objectives are for the immediate needs of the workshop. The third objective is for long term investment in staff development.
It would seem logically that this Workshop Staff meeting be done after the Feedback session so that the staff can incorporate what they discussed with the volunteers during the staff meeting.
8. Assessment of the Learning Process
In the process of assessing or evaluating the impact of the workshop one needs to reflect. This process of reflection serves both the workshop staff and the participants in different but nevertheless important ways. The participants can gain added confirmation of their own achievements in this workshop. In the process, they can improve their skills in analysis and expression of their own thoughts and feelings. The workshop staff can draw validation of where they have done well and where they need to improve. But perhaps most important to the staff would be the experience of seeing what contribution they have made in making each rural woman more self-reliant.
The Manual contains three modes or tools for assessment of learning. Each one has been tailored to suit the needs of each particular group.
End-of-Module Evaluation
(use for and township personnel)
An evaluation by participants is done at the end of each Module. This includes an assessment of the various activities in terms of what they learned and what would be practically useful to them. It also includes their assessment of effectiveness (or lack of it) of the workshop Staff.
The Learning "Temperature Chart"
(used for village women)
The Workshop Staff needs to make a poster on newsprint like the one in Figure 4. This is posted in the workshop room for village women. They are asked to individually mark at the end of each Activity.
End - of - workshop evaluation
For both project personnel and those for village women, workshop participants generally wish to express their thoughts about their experience. We should encourage this. This could be incorporated into the Closing Ceremony or held as the second part of the last Module evaluation.
FIGURE 2: TASK FLOW - FACILITATORS AND PARTICIPANTS
FIGURE 3: SAMPLE OF ROOM ARRANGEMENTS - MEETING OR ORIENTATION
FIGURE 3: SAMPLE OF ROOM ARRANGEMENTS - GROUP DISCUSSION
<section>4</section>
Evaluation
Evaluation
Evaluation is an essential tool for both participants and Facilitator and the rest of the workshop staff. Through the process of evaluation participants will have another opportunity to use their analytical skills as they reflect on their learning processes as well as what they actually have acquired or not acquired in terms of knowledge, attitudes and skills. The evaluation process, gives the workshop staff, especially the Facilitator a tool and system of checking whether the learning process is truly occurring for both the participants as well as the workshop staff. The workshop staff, needs reflect on their own process of learning as well as the evaluation process gives them this opportunity. In more immediate and practical terms, the workshop staff needs this "feedback" mechanism to be able to respond appropriately to the more immediate needs of the participants. It is through these feedback where corrective actions could be taken immediately where and when needed. When
things are going well, the workshop staff will be validated in their efforts and thus increase their sense of confidence.
There are two systems being introduced in this workshop. They are (a) the "quick or instant" type of evaluation called the "Learning Temperature Chart" and (b) the more methodical and in-depth questionnaire after each Module. Note however that the tools or instruments designed in this Manual are only for Modules I - 3. By the time participants are into Module 4, the feedback or evaluative element will be captured through the "Wrap-Up of the Workshop" and the "Closing Ceremonies".
The Learning Temperature Chart
This Chart is reproduced in Newsprint, so that participants can mark their assessment after each Activity every day. Although the impact of this is shallow compared to the in-depth questionnaire this serves two purposes: (a) it gives the participants a tool to register their more immediate response to the Activity and (b) it gives them and the workshop staff another tool to share a sense of fun in their work.
This could be useful both for Field Workers and rural women as well.
The In-Depth Questionnaire
At the end of Modules I - 3, Questionnaires have been designed to systematically capture the participants' reflections on a given module. This is particularly useful for the workshop for Field Workers. This could be too much or unnecessary for participants in women's groups.
These In-Depth Questionnaires are found at the back of this Manual.
The Use of Folk Art In Evaluation
This could be useful for both Field Worker and rural women's workshops. Participants are simply asked to form into groups and are asked to discuss among themselves to determine 3 4 important insights they have gained from the preceding Module. They are asked to use a symbol or drawing to express their ideas.
MODULE 1: LEARNING TEMPERATURE CHART
We pouted this Chart so that each one will be able to mark what they think of the learning process in each of the Topics/Activities in this Module.
Instructions
Right after the Activity please come to this Chart and mark this Chart with a stick (/) under the relevant column.
1 = I learned nothing
2 = I learned something
3 = I learned a lot
TOPIC 1: SETTING A TONE FOR PARTICIPATION
Activity 1: Self-Introduction
Activity 2: Expectation Setting
Activity 3: The Workshop Method
TOPIC 2: SITUATION ANALYSIS
Activity 1: My Village Today
Activity 2: My Village Five Years From Now
TOPIC 3: WHY ORGANIZE OURSELVES
Activity: Why Organize Ourselves
TOPIC 4: THE IMPORTANCE OF EACH PERSON
Activity 1: Appreciating Self and Others
Activity 2: Communication
Activity 3: Cooperation
Activity 4: Trust
TOPIC 5: SYNTHESIS OF MODULE I
MODULE 2: LEARNING TEMPERATURE CHART
We pouted this Chart so that each one will be able to mark what they think of the learning process in each of the Topics/Activities in this Module.
Instructions
Right after the Activity please come to this Chart and mark this Chart with a stick (/) under the relevant column.
1 = I learned nothing
2 = I learned something
3 = I learned a lot
TOPIC 1: GROUP CAPITAL FUND AND THE PROJECT REVOLVING FUND
Activity 1: Concept of Savings
Activity 2: Mutual Assistance Through Savings and Loan Operation
Activity 3: Determining Our Savings Capacity
Activity 4: Group Policies and Procedures
Activity 5: Group Capital Fund and the Project Revolving Fund
TOPIC 2: BASIC ELEMENTS OF A FUNCTIONING ORGANIZATION
Activity 1: Goal Setting
Activity 2: Objective Setting
Activity 3: Leadership Styles
Activity 4: Group Organizational Structure
Activity 5: Duties and Responsibilities of Officers
Activity 6: Group Decision-Making
Activity 7: WG Policies and Procedures
Activity 8: WG Regular Meetings
TOPIC 3 SYNTHESIS OF MODULE 2
MODULE 3: LEARNING TEMPERATURE CHART
We pouted this Chart so that each one will be able to mark what they think of the learning process in each of the Topics/Activities in this Module.
Instructions
Right after the Activity please come to this Chart and mark this Chart with a stick (/) under the relevant column.
1 = I learned nothing
2 = I learned something
3 = I learned a lot
TOPIC 1: CA USES OF SUCCESS OR FAILURE OF A BUSINESS
Activity 1: Lin's Cabbage Garden
Activity 2: Chu's Cabbage Garden
TOPIC 2: MY BUSINESS PLAN
Activity 1: My Proposed Business
Activity 2: My Marketing Plan
Activity 3: My Production Plan
Activity 4: My Management Plan
Activity 5: My Investment Plan
Activity 6: My Projected Net Cash Income
TOPIC 3: IMPORTANT BUSINESS RECORD
Activity 1: My Cash Record
TOPIC 4: SYNTHESIS
<section>5</section>
Module 1: The role of persons in organization building
Topic 1: Setting a tone for participation
Activity 1: Self introduction
Activity 2: Expectation setting
Activity 3: The workshop method
Topic 2: Situation analysis
Activity 1: My village today
Activity 2: My village five years from now
Topic 3: Why organize ourselves
Activity: Why organize ourselves
Topic 4: The importance of each person
Activity 1: Appreciating self and others
Activity 2: Communication
Activity 3: Cooperation
Activity 4: Trust
Topic 5: Synthesis of module 1
Module 1: The role of persons in organization building
Module 1: The role of persons in organization building
MODULE 1: VISUAL AIDS
M 1- 1
Self Introduction
Summary of Self-Introduction
Summary of Expectations
Draft Agreement of Participation
Participant Contribution in Running the Workshop
Teacher-Student Learning Process
Participatory Learning Process
"Eight Golden Steps"
Roots, Indications and
Consequences of Women's Low Status
9 - A
The Broken Jar
Approaches in Raising Women's Status
10-A
The Whole Jar
We Are One
Life Cycle
A Farm Scene
Communication
List of Items and Prices
Cooperation
Trust
Synthesis of Module I
INTRODUCTION
The key concept in this Workshop is participation. This is based on the belief that each person regardless of background has her own potential to achieve her own goal in life as well as her own unique contribution to her own family and community. Furthermore, that in this context we are working with adults who have years of experience to draw from and contribute in the learning process.
The word facilitator is used intentionally and not the word trainer. The word participant is also used intentionally to connote the sense of partnership between facilitator and participants working together as opposed to the word "trainee" where the flow of experience and knowledge is from "trainer to trainee".
This first Activity is the initial step in organization building. It is our belief that persons themselves build their organization, not the external procedures imposed on them. Activities are designed to give participants a chance to reflect on their current situation and what changes they want to make in order to achieve their aspirations. After reflecting on the external environment or their situation, participants are given a chance to reflect why organization building is essential to attain the changes they wish to accomplish.
Once a decision is reached to organize themselves, participants are then given a chance to focus on the essential foundation of an organization - their own person. The last segment of this Module therefore focuses on their individual potentials and weakness. Other key elements needed in the process of establishing an organization, namely: communication, trust, and cooperation are dealt with in this Module.
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES
By the end of 19 - 20 hours participants will be able to:
1. Understand the principle of participation as the key to organization building as well as for this Workshop;
2. Identify the root causes, indications and consequences why rural women have low status; identify approaches to improve their own status;
3. Internalize the need for organizing themselves;
4. Gain insights into the importance of each person with their potentials and weaknesses as the foundation for building their organization; internalize the importance of communication, cooperation and trust as important elements in organization building.
Topic 1: Setting a tone for participation
Background Rationale
Participation is the key to whether this workshop will be a success or not. The results or outputs of the workshop will be determined by the whether the Workshop staff are able to draw out ideas from participants. Ideas and experiences of participants are the main content of this Workshop. The workshop staff have to communicate in attitude, word and conduct their belief in the fundamental belief that each participant has something to contribute in this workshop.
Facilitator sets the tone based on this principle by being kind and friendly. She sets the pace by managing time effectively. She needs to be sensitive to how participants are actually learning with her pace or not.
This Topic has three parts namely (a) self-introduction as an important first start into this participatory principle; (b) articulating participant expectations and workshop staff expectations; (c) an introduction into the participatory process. These three parts will be structured into activities, which are intended to elicit participation.
This sequence of activities should be followed. Note that the Facilitator does not lecture in the beginning like a teacher. It is only at the end where a short lecture is given under the section on Workshop Philosophy. As was mentioned earlier under the section on Notes for Facilitators, theory is used to synthesize group experience and outputs.
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES:
By the end of 4.5 - 5 hours, participants will be able to:
1. Introduce themselves to other participants and in the process gain some self-confidence in being able to speak before the group and speak out their own thoughts;
2. Realize that the group has many years of experience which can be tapped for the process of building the group;
3. Discuss participant and staff expectations of the workshop as a basis for an "agreement " of expectations from each other in order to achieve the objectives of the workshop;
4. Internalize the concept of participation as the workshop philosophy.
Activity 1: Self introduction
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Participatory introductions /dialogue
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1 - 1; Visual Aid M 1 - 2; Guide Questions on newsprint;
Materials
Metaplan cards (sheets of paper cut 21 cm by 40 cm i. e. 32 cuts in Chinese measurement). There should be 4 pieces per participant, training staff, observers; Newsprint; multi-colored marker pees; tape; scissors; chalk/backboard.
Instruction For Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator welcomes the participants and sets a participatory tone. We must remember that these women are not used to being treated as participants in the process of learning. They are used to a "teacher-student" relationship. Facilitator therefore should set a new tone by being friendly and inviting. She thanks the people who helped in the preparation of this workshop. She names and thanks those who helped in preparing for this first day of the workshop.
3. She writes the Topic on the blackboard and the three Activities under this Topic. She tells the group that they will begin with Self Introduction. She encourages the participants by saying that it is true that many of them already know each other, but that this Activity could reveal new things. She tells them that this Activity will also give each one a chance to use their imagination in the way they introduce themselves.
4. Facilitator further explains that we will use the Metaplan technique in the Self-introduction. Metaplan is a technique which elicits imagination and creativity from participants. It also sets a tone of equality. It does not matter whether we can write or not. All we need is imagination and creativity. This activity could be fun.
5. Facilitator asks 3 participants to help her distribute Metaplan Cards and marker pens. Each person gets four Metaplan Cards. The set of multi-colored marker pens could be used be the group so that they have options on colors they want.
6. After each participant gets 4 Metaplan Cards, facilitator explains the Activity.
Task Instructions: Self Introduction
1. Each one is to make a symbol of their name, occupation, years of experience and hobby. You have l 5 minutes to do this individually. The only thing you are allowed to write are the numbers under the "years of experience". All other information must be in drawings of symbols.
2. After 15 minutes, anyone can volunteer to explain the drawings they have made on their 4 cards. We are asking you to come to the front to explain your drawings.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
7. Facilitator posts Visual Aid M1- 1: Self Introduction. Be sure to post two or three other extra newsprint on the wall, so that there is enough space for all participants, workshop staff and observers to post their 4 cards. Newsprint headings: (See Visual Aid M 1-1)
8. Facilitator could introduce herself first using the Metaplan cards. But if she thinks the group is enthusiastic enough that they want to do this first she encourages them and introduces herself later. Monitors should do the same. Remember each one has a function in this workshop. Principle of shared responsibility.
9. During the process, Facilitator from time to time makes encouraging remarks and acknowledges efforts participants are making and the imagination they show. Give extra encouragement for the shy ones.... the illiterates.
10. Give enough time for each participant. Do not rush. They are generally shy and need a lot of encouragement.
11. Facilitator and Monitors make notes. Use the format in Visual Aid M 1 - 2.
12. Monitor posts the results of the Self-Introduction, using Visual Aid M 1 - 1. Facilitator highlights some points in the summary.
Task Instructions: Group Reflection On Self Introduction
1. Kindly form yourselves into groups with 5 (or 7 if Facilitator thinks this is better) members in each group. Arrange your chairs in such a way as to make yourselves comfortable so that it is easy to talk to one another.
2. We will now reflect on what we have learned from this Activity which we just finished. There are Questions on the newsprint which could guide your discussions.
3. You have 15 minutes for discussion. Select someone to write down important points which you discuss. After 15 minutes one of you will then report to the large group, the results of your small group discussion.
Guide Questions
(On newsprint)
1 Did you enjoy yourselves in this activity? Why or why not?
2. Did you learn new things about yourself? What are these? (can overcome shyness? etc.)
3. Did you learn new things about others? What particular things did you learn of 2-3 persons in the group?
4. Name 2-3 persons you want to know more about.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
12. Facilitator summarizes on the blackboard the results of group discussions . Use blackboard and chalk. Use headings below.
Reasons for enjoying Activity
New Things Learned
want to know more about
self
others
13. Facilitator synthesizes the Activity emphasizing the following points:
Synthesis: Important Points
1. You seem to have enjoyed the Activity and learned a lot (Facilitator refers to some of the important points from the summary of the discussions of participants). I myself have learned new things. For example, I felt encouraged by the great effort that you have made, because I know that many of you are very shy. I am sometimes worried that I will not be able to do my task as Facilitator. Because you have shown me that you have tried your best to overcome your shyness, I feel that I have gained some strength from all of you to overcome my own lack of self confidence.
2. We have taken our first steps to increase our level of confidence. This is how we will gradually build our strength to overcome whatever barriers we have to regain our confidence in ourselves or to increase our confidence. In the process of doing this more and more in the workshop, we will find that we will have a better appreciation of ourselves. We might even be surprised of ourselves as we find our new talents and potentials.
3. Psychologists tell us that the more we are able to share our own ideas with others, the stronger we become. It is like opening new windows within ourselves, which we have kept closed for a long time.
4. I am therefore asking that each one continue to share their thoughts with others as we go along in this workshop. We must remember that educational background or lack of it or social status should not be used as an excuse to hold back our ideas. Look we have__ years of experience in this group. We are rich in experience, even if some of us do not have formal education. They are nevertheless rich in experience and ideas.
Module 1
Topic 1
Activity 1
Visual Aid M 1-1
Visual Aid M 1 - 1: Self-Introduction
Name
Occupation
No.of Years of
Hobby Experience
Module 1
Topic 1
Activity 1
Visual Aid M 1-2
Visual Aid M 1- 2: Summary of Self-Introduction
1 . Type of Occupation
Total No. Years of Experience
Total No.of Participants
2. Types of Hobbies
Total No of Participants
Activity 2: Expectation setting
Time
1. 5 hours
Methodology
Discussion/lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1- 3; Visual Aid M 1 - 4; Visual Aid M 1 - 5; Guide Questions on newsprint; objectives of Module I on newsprint.
Materials
Newsprint; multi-colored marker pees; tape; scissors; chalk/blackboard.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator links the previous Activity and this Activity:
We had our first experience in what it is to participate fully in the previous Activity. We learned a lot about ourselves and others. This principle of participation will again be required of us in this Activity. Since we need to do this all through out the workshop, the more we do it the easier it will become.
The name of the Activity which we are about to do is "Expectation Setting". (Facilitator points to the Newsprint which has the headings for the Activities under Topic 1.) It is important for us to articulate our expectations of ourselves and for ourselves, from other participants and from Facilitator. The Facilitator and Monitors who compose the workshop staff, will also articulate their own expectations. This results in matching our expectations, so that right from the very start we will have an idea which among these expectations can be met and which cannot be met by this workshop. Once we agree on those things expectations would have in effect come to an agreement of how we work with one another. We could sign an "Agreement of Participation" which should contain our commitment to each other and a constant reminder to us all through this workshop.
Task Instructions: Group Work on Expectations
1. Kindly form yourselves into small groups of 5 persons per group.
2. I will give you Guide Questions for discussion. Please note that these are not "test" questions for pupils or students. They are simply a guide for your discussion. It could help in having some order in the way you proceed with your task. It can also be helpful in writing up the report of your discussions.
3. At the end of 15 minutes, each group will report the results of their small group discussion to the larger group. You therefore need to select a member to make this report.
Guide Questions
(Facilitator writes on newsprint ahead of time)
1. List 3 - 4 things you expect to learn from this workshop.
2. What 2 -3 things do you expect from yourself in order to acquire the things you expect to learn?
3. What 2 - 3 things do you expect from other participants?
4. What 2 - 3 things do your expect from the workshop staff?
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
3. During this group discussion Facilitator and Monitors go around and help groups by clarifying instructions or asking more detailed questions so that discussions can be enhanced. Facilitator should not "teach" participants what to say. This is their expectation, not the Facilitator's or the Monitor's.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
4. Facilitator summarizes the reports from small groups. Use blackboard and chalk. Use headings as per Visual Aid M 1 - 3.
5. If there are expectations which cannot be met at this workshop, such as to have skills in pig raising, Facilitator tells participants that these cannot be met in this workshop, because our main focus in this workshop is the self, how to organize ourselves and how to prepare a business plan. Such needs could be met later as part of the group activities (after the workshop). Facilitator clarifies points if there are misconceptions.
Synthesis: Important Points
6. There is no synthesis however Facilitator links the results of this part of the Activity to the "Agreement on Participation".
We have now clarified our expectations of one another. We could perhaps summarize our expectations into an "Agreement". I have a draft of what this Agreement could contain. But this is a draft. It needs to be discussed. During the discussions, small groups could review this draft and make the changes they want to make, or add to it. Only after discussions, will we be able to finalize this Agreement.
7. Facilitator posts the newsprint which contains the draft: Visual Aid M 1 - 4 "Agreement of Participation".
Task Instructions: Finalizing the "Agreement of Participation"
1. Kindly form yourselves into small groups of 5 persons per group.
2. Please discuss the draft among yourselves and at the end of 10 minutes, please have one of the members of your group report on (a) what you want to change; (b) what you want to add. Your agreement.
3. We will then sign the " Agreement of Participation".
SIGNING OF THE AGREEMENT OF PARTICIPATION
Task Instructions: Participant Contribution In Running the Workshop
8. Facilitator proceeds with the last task under this Activity - Participant Contribution in Running the Workshop.
9. Facilitator posts Visual Aid M 1 - 5. She asks participants to volunteer for the various task groups listed on the Visual Aid. She explains each task area as follows:
Task Group 1: Feedback
Participant Volunteers to give Feedback to the Staff on the way the workshop is being run and what improvements are needed.
We need 3 volunteers for every day. Volunteers and the staff will meet after supper for 30-45 minutes.
Task Group 2: Energizers
Prepare and undertake "Energizers". This consists in soliciting volunteers from participants and staff to dance, sing or recite a poem or other similar activities. These "Energizers" will be used at the beginning of Activities or when the work is so heavy and we need a break.
Task Group 3: Order Keepers
Assist the Staff in (a) putting order in the work room and preparing for the work sessions; (b) in collecting Visual Aids at the end of the day.
Task Group 4:___
Other suggestions from the participants (Facilitator asks for suggestions)
Note that there is no summary and synthesis in this Activity. Participants would be very tired as this point. There was so much material and outputs. It is better done as the introduction for Activity 3.
Module 1
Topic 1
Activity 2
Visual Aid M 1-3
Visual Aid M 1 - 3: Summary of Expectations
Want to learn about
Expectations from self
Expectations from participants
Expectations from Staff
Module I
Topic 1
Activity 2
Visual Aid M 1-4
Visual Aid M 1- 4: Draft Agreement of Participation
A Promise to Myself as Participant
1. I believe that I have a unique contribution to make in this workshop.
2. I am determined to participate actively.
3. I am determined to learn as much as I can.
4. I will make 100% effort to help others to participate.
5. I will be disciplined in being on time for all activities and in the way I conduct myself in all things.
A Promise to Myself as Facilitator
1. I believe that I have a unique contribution to make in this workshop.
2. I am determined to do my best as a Facilitator.
3. I am determined to learn new ideas from participants.
4. I will adhere strictly to " 8 Golden Rules for Facilitators", (Task Flow Process).
5. I will be disciplined in (a) the thorough study and preparations; (b) my time use; (c) the way I conduct myself in all things.
A Promise to Myself as Monitor
1. I believe that I have a unique contribution to make in this workshop.
2. I am determined to do my best with regard to tasks assigned to me and to be generally helpful.
3. I am determined to learn new ideas from participants and from the workshop staff
4. I will tee disciplined in (a) the thorough preparations and implementation of tasks assigned to me; (b) my time use, (c) the way I conduct myself in all things.
Module 1
Topic I
Activity 2
Visual Aid M 1-5
Visual Aid M 1- 5: Participant Contribution In Running the Workshop
Task Group 1: Feedback Volunteers
Day
Name
Task Group 2: Energizers
Task Group 3: Order Keepers
Task Group 4:___
Activity 3: The workshop method
Methodology
Discussion/lecture
Time
1 hour
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1- 6; Visual Aid M I - 7; Visual Aid M 1 - 8; Guide Questions on newsprint;
Materials
Newsprint; multi-colored marker pees; tape; scissors; chalk/blackboard.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
2. Linking previous Activities to this Activity.
Facilitator tells the group that at this stage of the Workshop the participants, Facilitator and Monitors would have had some experience of participation. This was brought about by:
(a) the fact that we all introduced ourselves in the same manner (Metaplan technique);
(b) acknowledged the fact that this group has___ years of experience which we said we would share in this workshop;
(c) that each one of us had a chance to speak and participate in group discussions;
(d) that based on the principle of equality we have signed a "Agreement of Participation";
(e) that we have agreed to share functions in running the Workshop through the formation of Task Groups.
We therefore have started the process of participation not only in speaking and discussions but we have started to participate in sharing the responsibilities of the workshop.
2. In this Activity called "The Workshop Method" we will analyze what this means for ourselves. It is important to reflect on this because method is based on a philosophy or a value which can become the foundation not only of this workshop, but the way we hope to work with one another all through the workshop and after the workshop in the women's groups which we hope we will form. The way we work in the workshop therefore is learning not only a way of doing things but the beginning of acquiring new values of EQUALITY AND DEMOCRACY.
Task Instructions: Group Discussion on "The Workshop Method"
1. Kindly form yourselves into small groups of 5 persons per group. Try to form new groups so that you will get to know more members.
2. I will give you Guide Questions again as I did in previous Activities. May I remind you that as I said earlier, these are not "test" questions. They simply guide your discussions.
3. Just like before, after 15 minutes, one of your small group members will report the results of your discussions to the larger group.
Guide Questions
(Facilitator writes on newsprint ahead of time)
1. Why do call this a "workshop" and not "training"? Try to recall what we have done in the previous Activities. Think of a factory. What do people do in order to produce something?
2. What is the difference between learning as adults and learning as children?
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
3. Facilitator writes on the blackboard the summary of their discussions. As she does this she tries to illicit more information from the group by asking questions once in a while.
Synthesis: Important Points
4. Facilitator synthesizes with the use of Visual Aids M 1 - 6 and M 1 - 7.
(a) Workshop method
This is a workshop which means that we will only be successful in what we want to learn and do, if everyone puts in their best efforts and participate fully. Being a workshop, we will have many activities and discussions by groups. This is like a factory, where sometimes groups will work on one part and another group another part in order to produce something. We need everybody therefore. If one is lazy or shy, then we cannot produce the best product. We need everyone to participate.
(b) Adults learning together
We are all adults and therefore each one of us has many years of experience to draw from in order to contribute to the group's fund of knowledge. We need not be shy even if we have only completed some years of formal education. Life itself is a teacher and even if we cannot read or write, informally we have learned many things through life. We need to share this accumulated knowledge with others. We must - each of us contribute in the discussion.
(c) We are all equal
We are all equal regardless of background. If one of us is farming vegetables, another selling handicrafts, another one a teacher, another one with a big house, another one with a small house, some can read and write others cannot, etc. WE ARE ALL EQUAL. Each one of us has something to contribute. This variety of backgrounds makes our group rich in experience. Because we have different backgrounds, we can help each other where we are weak. And we can share with others where we are strong or of what we know.
(d) Teacher-student versus Participation
In a teacher-student relationship, the flow of knowledge is from the teacher to the students. Our belief is that the teacher knows more than the students. It is like this illustration. (Facilitator shows Visual Aid M 1 - 6. The teacher is like this jar or pot which pours water (knowledge) to the empty jars or pots (students).
(e) Participation
Participation as a learning process is suited for adults who believe they are equal with one another. We believe that each of us has some knowledge and experience which we could share with each other. The Facilitator is one of us. She is not a teacher. She simply helps everyone to share their own knowledge. She too has some knowledge and experience which she shares with us, just as you have some knowledge and experience to share with her. We learn from one another . This learning process is true for everyone, including the Facilitator. It is like this illustration. (Facilitator shows Visual Aid M 1 - 7). Notice that the flow of water is more abundant. It is coming from everyone. Compare this with the "teacher-student" mode of learning. The flow of knowledge is practically one way - only from the teacher. Our work process should be as in this Task Flow which we call " The 8 Golden Steps". (Facilitator explains Visual Aid M I - 8).
Facilitator concludes by giving examples from the previous Activities. Self-Introduction was participatory. The way we expressed our Expectations was participatory. Our Agreement of Participation details how each of us will participate. The Workshop responsibilities are shared between and among the workshop Staff and the participants as in the Task Groups we have organized.
We will continue to use this method of learning in our workshop
Module 1
Topic I
Activity 3
Visual Aid M 1-6
Visual Aid M 1-6: Teacher - Student Learning Process
Module I
Topic 1
Activity 3
Visual Aid M 1-7
Visual Aid M 1-7: Participatory Learning Process
Module 1
Topic 1
Activity 3
Visual Aid M 1-8
Visual Aid M 1-8 :"Eight Golden Steps" Task Flow - Facilitator and Participants
Note that substantial tiem is devoted to evolving participant outputs. Facilitators time is spent mainly in structuring the Activity. Only Step 8 does the Facilitator add her own ideas. This structuring of work provides opportunity for participants to see their own outputs separate from that of the Facilitator. This is another step towards building individual and group confidence. Empowerment.
Topic 2: Situation analysis
Background and Rationale:
This topic is critical in the process of building women's group. For their group to attain basic sustainability they themselves must be able to analyze their current issues which affect their lives and determine the needed strategies which could improve their situation. There are 3 phases under this Topic. The first stage is when we give the participants an opportunity to analyze their village situation as it is today. This is done from their perspectives as women. They need to identify the root causes of problems they perceive in their own present situation.
In the second phase they will be asked to determine which among the problems they can address within a 5-year period. In the process of transforming their village within five years to their "dream" village, participants will be asked to identify possible solutions and determine approaches to improve women's status in their village.
The third phase is an analysis of why group organization is needed to achieve the changes they want to make.
Output Objectives
At the end of 6 hours, the participants will have:
1. Analyzed the existing situation of women in their village; identified and analyzed the root causes, the indications and consequences why women have low status;
2. Identified the approaches to raise their own status individually and as a group.
Activity 1: My village today
Time
2. 5 hours
Methodology
Discussion/ folk art work/lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1- 9; Visual Aid M 1- 9 A; Guide Questions on newsprint;
Materials
3 newsprint (newspaper size) per group; multi-colored maker pens (I set per group); tape; scissors; extra newsprint for facilitator; chalks; blackboard.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator picks up on some points which the women brought out from the;; Expectations, focusing on what the participants themselves see as problems they wish to correct as a result of this workshop.
3. Facilitator links the issues the participants raised in the Activity on Expectations, with the Activity at hand - Situation Analysis of "My Village Today" (from a woman's perspective). She further emphasizes the fact that we need to examine the root causes of problems we see in our current situation. We need to find the root causes of our problems first before we can find the right solutions for them.
Task Instructions: My Village Today (from a woman's perspective)
1. Kindly form yourselves in small groups with 5 members.
2. For 10 minutes you are being asked to discuss among yourselves how you perceive the situation in your village today. You should discuss this from your perspective as a woman. In other words to identify issues which are related to your needs.
3. After 10 minutes, the staff will go around and give each group one newsprint and a set of multi-colored marker pens.
4. As a cooperative effort among yourselves, draw a representation of your village with the ideas which you have just discussed.
5. After 20 minutes, one of your small group members will present the results of your group work to the larger group.
6. I will give you Guide Questions again as I did in previous Activities. May remind you that as I said earlier, these are not "test" questions. They simply guide your discussions.
Guide Questions
(Facilitator writes newsprint ahead of time)
Note to Facilitator:
These Guide Questions should be explained carefully. Not just post them like the other Guide Questions. Be careful however, that you do not make your own conclusions. Simply help them to understand the Questions.
Self
Are women in your village convinced of their own potentials? Are they independent enough? Are they bound by traditional thinking? Do they have sufficient functional literacy skills? Technological skills? Business skills? Do women plan their families?
Family
What is women's situation in the family? How much time is spent in household chores, working in the field, child care? How strong is woman's role in decision-making especially as regards money, education of the children; preference whether the boy or girl will go to school?
Community
What is women's situation in the community ? Participation in political and cultural activities ? Situation in relation to activities for income- generation? Acquiring technological skills? Credit availability? Opportunities for education, jobs, skills development? Literacy classes?
Basic Services
Availability of basic services for Mother's health, family planning, children's health? Situation of basic services, such as household water? Water for production? Environmental situation - are there pollution sources? What is being done about this? How does this affect family health? How does this affect production?
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
4. If after 20 minutes the Facilitator and Monitors see that sub-groups are not ready, Facilitator then asks the group if they want more time. If they do want more time, Facilitator then gives them another 10 minutes. Facilitator must remember the principle of time discipline as tool for creative thought and outputs. After this time extension, Facilitator should not give further extensions. This is the way you give a tone of time discipline at the very beginning of the workshop process. Facilitator and Monitors should go around during the group discussion and group work, giving encouragement and clarification but never to dictate what they have to draw.
5. Sub-groups present results of their discussions in folk art work. Give each group about 57 minutes. After the presentation, ask the other members of the group if they have anything else to add or modify in the presentation. As they present their folk art work, Facilitator points to some significant points. Encourages and praises their work.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
6. Facilitator summarizes the presentation of the group and identifies the common root causes of the problems in the village. She makes notes on newsprint of the common causes of these problems. The focus of this summary should be what the women may have brought out in their drawings.
Suggested Summary headings:
Roots
Indications
Consequences
7. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 1 - 9 as notes to link in what they women have brought out of themselves.
Reminder: Visual Aid M 1 - 9 must not be posted until Facilitator is ready for Synthesis. If you do this, the participants will not think any more. They will simply copy what is on the Visual Aid.
8. Facilitator posts Visual Aid M 1 - 9. Facilitator then synthesizes or adds and enhances women's knowledge by using Visual Aid M 1- 9. This synthesis should be done as a combination of a dialogue-lecture (lecture and asking questions once in a while).
Synthesis: Important Points
9. These could be some of the possible issues women could raise.
(a) A culture of dependency
- a way of life and thinking of dependency
- serious situation of poverty: money and creative thought
- progress is slow in community - women (half of population) deprived
(b) Women's limited Participation in Economic Productive life
- women work very hard
- burden has increased (child care and more farm work)
- do not view themselves as important compared to men
- society generally do not view them as important as men
- are limited to what is given to them as their role
- traditional thinking sometimes is an obstacle
-women's self worth improves if they can engage in their own chosen activities
- their status with family and society improves with economic activities
- but women lack technological skills... productivity low
- lack capital to engage in " side line occupation"
- individual savings too low
- some lack literacy skills
- lack opportunity to learn business skills
- lack opportunity to use creative potentials
- her world view limited because she is not able to go far from her neighborhood
- community is deprived of potential new economic activities
- no "spin" effect
(c) Lack of good organization
- the poor thinks they have no resources
- do not believe in the potential of the group
- but we can get organized and mobilize our own resources
10. The following are "notes" for Facilitators. Preparation prior to the Activity is needed for the Facilitator to make her own notes of what she thinks and feels will need emphasis in a given particular rural group of women. She should not lecture all this material in the Manual.
(1) A culture of dependency
When we speak of a "culture of dependence" we mean a way of life and thinking of dependency. When this condition prevails in many households in a community, the various indications and consequences cited above prevail. A serious situation of poverty not only in terms of money, but creative thought permeates the community. When you think that half of the population (women) do not have the creative power to contribute to development in a given community, we should not be surprised why progress is slow.
Although family and society in general benefits from tradition in some cases tradition has resulted in keeping women away from achieving their full potential.
(2) Women's limited participation in economic productive life
Women work very hard especially in agricultural communities. They are increasingly becoming the main farmers. But this hard work combined with their traditional role as child-bearer and nourisher has increased their burden. They however do not view themselves and are not viewed by society with importance equal to the men in the household.
It is when women are able to engage in their own separate economic activity which generates additional income for the household when they experience their own self worth and when the rest of the household improve their view of her status.
But women generally lack technological skills and some have low literacy skills. This results in low productivity. They do not have the necessary capital to start or expand their "sideline occupation". Some women may want to plant vegetables and market this but do not have the proper technological information and skills to do so. Their own savings are too small to capitalize this economic activity. Some lack of literacy skills which puts them in additional disadvantage to learn new things.
The result of this situation is more than financial deprivation of additional income for the household. In addition other negative effects may be observed as follows:
(a) The Opportunity to use women's creative potential
When we engage in new things such as a new business we learn from this new experience and our creative powers are enhanced or improved. For example if a woman decides to raise vegetables for the first time she will have to learn the proper way of preparing the soil planting and harvesting these. She takes a risk and in doing so consciously or unconsciously she affirms her confidence in herself. This is a new skill for her. She will have to learn how to organize her time between and among her other chores and responsibilities. This is a new situation which demands creative thought and action. She will need to find good market and manage her small business well to make a profit.
She is learning to make critical decisions and taking the responsibility of the consequences of her decisions. This is a new world for her as she learns to deal with people outside her home and neighborhood. Her family becomes involved in this new venture and all the good experience it provides.
(b) The Opportunity to help expand other economic services
When more diverse activities are engaged in by members of a community these activities could provide other opportunities for other economic activities. For example. if several women in a community engage in pig-raising there will come a time when transport services will be needed. Other members in the community therefore could be hired to transport these products. Pig pens would need to be constructed. Cement will be needed. Additional labor would be needed. When this spin effect happens the whole community is benefited. The progress of the community may be slow in the beginning as women raise few pigs. But once their volume of production increases this spin effect makes the progress of the community faster.
(3) Lack of good organization
When we are poor we think that we do not have enough resources to engage in business. We tend to do things on our own. We borrow from our relatives and friends to capitalize a small business we would like to engage in. But our friends and relatives also have limited resources. We usually do not think of organizing ourselves end tapping our own resources as a group.
In effect we do not believe in our own potential and that of members of the community.
Instructions for Facilitator (4)
11. Facilitator ends this session by telling the participants that the newsprint on Visual Aid M 19: "Roots, Indications and Consequences of Women's Low Status" and M 1- 9 A: The Broken Jar will remain posted on the wall. We will make this as a reference in the succeeding activities.
Module 1
Topic 2
Activity 1
Visual Aid M 1-9
VISUAL AID M 1-9: A SYNTHESIS
I. ROOTS, INDICATIONS AND CONSEQUENCES OF WOMEN'S LOW STATUS
Reasons
Indications
Consequences
- culture of dependence
- low self esteem
- low contribution to household and community development
- afraid to take risk
- role in decision-making in household and society is limited or small
- traditional thinking
- short-term vision
- many children
- mother and child health poor
- time for productive activities limited
- quality of life generally poor
- heavy burden
- quality of children not so high
- lack of technical skills
- low productivity
- poverty; inefficient use of resources
- limited business skills
- income generation limited
- limited or small contribution to household income
- limited experience in business
- low literacy
- lack creativity
- narrow world view
- lack of funds
- income-generation limited
- contribution to household income limited
- lack of organization
- local resources not tapped
- waiting for government to help
Module 1
Topic 2
Activity 1
Visual Aid M 1-9A
Visual Aid M 1 -9 A: The Broken Jar or Pot
Reasons
 culture of dependence
 traditional thinking many children
 lack of technical skills
 limited business skills low literacy
 lack of funds
 lack of organization
Activity 2: My village five years from now
Time
2.5 hours
Methodology
Discussion/folk art work/lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1- 10; Visual Aid M 1- 10 A; Guide Questions on newsprint;
Materials
3 newsprint (newspaper size) per group; multi-colored marker pens (I set per group); tape; scissors; extra newsprint for facilitator: chalks; blackboard.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
2. Maintain the groups which you had in the Situation Analysis Activity on " My Village Today.
3. Reflect back to the group key points of the summary of Activity I. Tell them that they should make the Synthesis of Activity 1 (Visual Aid M 1 - 9 and M 1 - 9 A) as a reference for this Activity they are about to do.
Task Instructions: My Village Five Years From Now
1. Kindly remain in your groups under Activity 1.
2. For 10 minutes you are being asked to discuss among yourselves what changes you can realistically make of the current women's low status. Refer to the drawing that you had in Activity I (My Village Today) and Visual Aid M I - 9. This should help you in your discussions.
3. After 10 minutes, the staff will go around and give each group one newsprint and a set of multi-colored marker pens.
4. As a cooperative effort among yourselves, draw a representation of your village with the ideas which you have just discussed.
5. After 20 minutes, one of your small group members will present the results of your group work to the larger group.
6. I will give you Guide Questions again as I did in previous Activities.
Guide Questions
(Facilitator writes on newsprint ahead of time)
Having identified some of the root causes. indications and consequences of why women has c low status. identify some of areas which you think can he changed and how. Be realistic about what can be accomplished within a 5-year period.
1. What changes need to be made about yourself? How?
2. What changes can be made in your family? How?
3. What changes can be made in your community? How?
4. As a cooperative effort among yourselves, draw a representation of your village with the ideas which you have just discussed.
5. After 20 minutes, one of your small group members will present the results of your group work to the larger group.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
4. If after 20 minutes the Facilitator and Monitors see that sub-groups are not ready after 20 minutes, Facilitator then asks the group if they want more time. If they want more time, Facilitator then gives them another 10 minutes. Facilitator must remember the principle of time discipline as tool for creative thought and outputs. After this time extension, Facilitator should not give further extensions. This is the way you give a tone of time discipline at the very beginning of the training process.
5. Facilitator and Monitors should go around during the group discussion and group work, giving encouragement and clarification but never to dictate what they have to draw.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
6. Summarizes the outputs of the participants by noting down on the blackboard what comes out of the presentations. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M I - 10 as a Guide when she works the summary of what comes out of the participant presentation. She should however not dictate what is in the Visual Aid if the presentation does not have any of these items. Facilitator could add these during the synthesis. Suggested headings for the summary is as follows:
Roots
how to change
Indications of change
Consequences
Synthesis: Important Points
7. Facilitator posts Visual Aid M 1- 10. (Visual Aid M 1- 10 A should be posted at the end of the synthesis, not at this stage.) She indicates from the Visual Aid which among these the participants have identified. She further tells them that she would like to add and enhance what they have presented. She then goes over each point on the Visual Aid, using notes found below in this Manual.
8. It is very important that Facilitator does not lecture all the material found in this section of the Manual. She should make her own notes, prior to this Activity, using material in the Manual and enhancing her presentation with examples from her own experience. The material below are "notes".
(a) A higher value of Self
We need to change our own view of ourselves so that we emphasize our potentials. In the process of changing this view we will value ourselves higher. For example, oftentimes we look at ourselves as inferior to our husbands. If we have this view of ourselves, we will therefore unconsciously be dependent on him. We will not have our own views on situations independent of his views. We will not have a clear role in deciding on things. Our family therefore has been deprived of another source of good ideas when it comes to decision-making.
If we take the steps towards self- reliance, as we have identified these steps in the summary above (M I - 8 newsprint), we will gradually find that we will appreciate ourselves more. This increases our confidence. We will find that we will take more risks in doing new things in business for example. As we succeed in these new things, our confidence in ourselves increases. We will also find that in time we begin to have be having longer term plans for ourselves and the family, compared to the time when all we were concerned with was the day to day needs of the family.
(b) Adjusting our priorities for our children's future
We need to have a more reflective look at how we have set priorities in our lives in order to prepare for a better future of our children. I doing this we will consider our own needs and personal priorities as well. If we want a better education for our children, we will therefore need to look at our present capabilities in providing for the number of children we need to plan for. Our times are no longer like those of our parents and grand parents. During their times, resources were more abundant. Opportunities for employment were perhaps more available with little educational preparations. The world in general has changed all this. Resources are not as abundant as before. Education is important if anyone will want a good future.
We therefore need to look into our priorities. Fewer children nowadays means that each of our children - boy or girl can have a better chance at having a better life. In more immediate terms, fewer children means that the mother and wife will have more time and opportunities to develop her own potentials for productive activities in the business and social spheres. In so doing she will not only find greater fulfillment of her own potentials but that she will be contributing substantially to providing for the needs of her children.
(c) The Need for New Shills
There are three areas of skills we have identified as basic skills to improve our self-reliance, namely technological skills, business skirts and functional literacy skills. All these are needed to improve our own self image to ourselves and with our family and community. Furthermore, these are needed so that we can increase our level of productivity and increase our income contribution to our households.
Basic functional literacy and numeracy skills are needed if we decide to engage in business. Once our business becomes successful and gets bigger, we will need these skills in keeping records for example, in learning more about the technology of our business, or to read about new information about our business. When we go to the market, we will not feel apprehensive or afraid that someone will cheat us.
We also need to learn new technological skills, so that when we are able to have more funds from our business profits, we will be ready to expand to other types of economic activities.
We will be able to acquire business skills as we engage in any type of economic activity which generates income. Association with friends in the village is another source of knowledge about how to do good business. We learn from each other as we share with each other what succeeds.
(d) Decision to engage in Business
Knowing new skills is not enough. We should be able to use these skills so that we will earn income for our family. We therefore should choose the skills we learn so that we can use them for earning income. We need to decide to do this. Once a decision has been made, we actually have taken a risk for which we are committed to take the consequence of success or failure in our decision. But we will never progress if we are afraid to take risks. In the beginning we take small risks, according to our estimate of our capabilities. As our knowledge and confidence increases, we will gradually take bigger risks. Usually bigger risks which are well thought out means higher returns for our investment in money, time and efforts. But just taking risks is not enough, we need a good business plan before we invest out money, time and effort.
(e) The Need to Organize ourselves
It is not easy to attain self-reliance by ourselves. It has been the experience of women in many parts of the world that if they are organized, they are able to attain self-reliance faster. Being organized means that I am able as an individual to "borrow" strength from others until I am able to gain my own strength. It seems much easier for example to save money for investing in business, if a whole group is doing the same thing. The determination and enthusiasm of the group gives me strength when I am feeling undisciplined or when I am finding all sorts of reasons not to do that which I must do. I allow myself to be checked by others from my weak moments. I can lose face if l do not do what I committed myself to do in the group.
Once we are organized, the group can mobilize our own local resources. We can have more ideas to solve problems without waiting for outside help. For example, if we are organized, we can make sure that the services in our village clinic be given regularly and in better quality. If I am by myself, I will not have the courage to ask the doctor or midwife in the village clinic to do this. Another example is how to make the Literacy classes more regular and with better quality. If we are organized, we can help motivate the members to attend the classes regularly. We can even help them with their homework. We can talk to the teacher to make his or her classes more practical and interesting.
If we are organized the extension worker will save his time and give us more time because we will be able to help him or her gather the people together for him or her to teach us what we need. If we are organized we can think of ways in improving our own level of culture and that of the community by thinking of ways in educating ourselves and the community through folk presentations. These presentations for example could carry messages which hassomething to do with out experiences, struggles and success or failure in trying to raise our status. Other examples, such as thinking out ways on how to provide water for our households and plants and small animals.
Module I
Topic 2
Activity 2
Visual Aid M 1-10
VISUAL AID M 1-10
II. APPROACHES TO RAISING WOMEN'S STATUS
Roots of Problems
How to change
Indicators of change
Consequence of change
- culture of dependence
- improve self confidence
- participate in social and economic activities
- higher value of self
- traditional thinking
- take small risks in beginning; increase risk later
- increased role in decision-making at home and community
- longer term vision
- saving for small business
- longer-term plan for business and children's education
- many children
-decision to limit family size
- using appropriate contraceptives
- children are well cared for; mothers's health better; lighter burden
- lack skills
- learn at best two new skills
- training in new technology
- enaging in new income generating activities
- lack business skills
- decision and determination
- learning from friends/group
- better nun business
- low literacy skill
- attending literacy classes
- passed the appropriate level
- able to real and write
- lack of funds
- self to save
- disciplined and regular savings
- personal funds increased
- join savings group
- regular attendance at meetings
- mutual help among members
- increased group savings
- lack of organization
- women to organize
- group capital fund
- capital fund used for income generation
- advocating for needed MCH/FP services
- MCH/FP services available with quality and regularity
- advocating for needed functional literacy classes
- functional literacy classes regularized with better quality
- advocating for needed extension services
- extension services with regularity and qualify
- advocating for other needed services
- other needed services as identified from real needs of community
- women to have greater in village management
- village council consulting women's groups
- better community functioning
Module I
Topic 2
Activity 2
Visual Aid M 1-10 A
Visual Aid M 1 -10A: The Whole Jar or Pot
Reasons
 Improve self confidence
 take small ridks in beginning
 increase risk later
 longer term vision
 decision to limit family size
 learn at least two new skills
 decision and determination
 health
 self to save
 join savings group
 women to organize
 women to have greater say in village management
Topic 3: Why organize ourselves
Background and Rationale
In the two previous Activities participants focused on their current situation and changes they need in order to improve their status as women. One of the areas identified as a need is that they are not organized. The other issues raised will be tackled in the succeeding Activities. The Activity under this Topic will give the participants an opportunity to deepen their understanding of the need to organize themselves.
Output Objectives
By the end of 1. 5 hours participants will have:
1. Internalized the value of the need to organize themselves in order to achieve self-reliance;
2. Committed themselves to organize.
Activity: Why organize ourselves
Time
1. 5 hours
Methodology
Group Dynamics Exercises/ Discussion/ Lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1 - 11; Guide Questions on newsprint
Materials
60 wooden or bamboo chopsticks; 3 soup bowls; 18 spoons of rice or flour - One spoon-full placed in envelopes individually.
multi-colored marker pens (I set per group); tape; scissors; extra newsprint for facilitator; chalks; blackboard.
Notes for Facilitator
There will be two Group Dynamics Exercises in this Activity.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator links this Topic and Activity with the two previous Activities, using Visual Aids M 1- 9 and M 1 - 10.
In doing this Facilitator tells the group that in the two previous Activities participants focused on their current situations and what they hope to change in their situation in order to improve their status as women. One of the areas identified as a need is that they are not organized. The other issues raised will be tackled in the succeeding Activities. The Activity under this Topic will give the participants an opportunity to deepen their understanding of the reasons why organizing themselves will accelerate the pace in meeting their individual needs and thereby raising their status and self-reliance.
Group Dynamics (1) The Chopsticks
Task Instructions: The Chopsticks
1. Form yourselves into new groups of 5 members in each group.
2. Each group will be given 20 wooden chopsticks each.
3. Once the chopsticks are distributed, Group 1 breaks the chopsticks one by one.
4. Group 2 breaks the chopsticks after they have bunched them into twos .
5. Group 3 tries to break the chopsticks after they have bunched them into 3s.
6. Group 4 tries to break the 20 chopsticks as one bunch.
Facilitator asks each sub-group to demonstrate in front of everyone . The 4 sub-groups should take turns showing the larger group.
Facilitator ends this by asking the group to think of what lessons they reamed from this. SHE DOES NOT ASK THEM TO SHARE THEIR THOUGHTS AT THIS STAGE. SHE GOES INTO THE NEXT DIRECTLY.
Group Dynamics (2) The Rice (or Flour) Bowl
Task Instructions: Rice Bowl
1. I need 18 volunteers.
2. Kindly form yourselves into three sub-groups as follows
 Group I with only 3 persons;
 Group 2 with only 5 persons;
 Group 3 with 10 persons.
3. I will give each one of you one spoon of rice (in envelopes).
4. There are 3 bowls at the desk. Each one is marked 1,2,3.
5. Group 1 members will place their rice in bowl No. i; Group 2 in bowl No. 2 and Group 3 in bowl No. 3.
6. Group I will do the task first, followed by group 2 and then group 3.
(Facilitator should not say anything after this)
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
3. After these 2 Group Dynamics s, facilitator forms sub-groups of 4 - 5 participants each. She gives them 15 minutes for group discussion. She asks them to discuss the following:
Guide Questions
(On newsprint)
1. What lessons did we learn from The Chopsticks Exercise?
2. What lesson did we learn from The Rice or Flour Bowl Exercise ?
3. How do these apply to the need for us to organize?
4. Whet other reasons can you think of why we need to organize ourselves in order for us to attain self-reliance?
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
4. Facilitator summarizes the reports of the sub-groups. Use the guide questions as headings
Synthesis: Important Points
5. Facilitator emphasizes the following important points:
(a) The Chopsticks
It is easy to break the chopsticks individually. The more there was to the bunch, the harder it was to break. If we are organized it is difficult for others who do not believe in our objectives to destroy our group. The more there are who believe in the same thing, the stronger they are.
(b) The Rice or Flour Bowl
The more members in the group, the more rice or flour they had in the bowl. When we are organized the more women who believe in the same thing, the more power they have. They are able to mobilize their resources, no matter how small. Even a spoon of rice or flour when put together by 10 women were more than those by 2 or three women. The flour is like money saved. But the group that had 10 women had more than flour, there are 10 women who could think of ideas which could enrich themselves. They can learn from one another. There are many more sources of experiences and ideas.
(c) Other Reasons
When we organize ourselves this is a voluntary decision. Not because someone wants us to organize. We organize based on what we ourselves determine to be important to ourselves. Because its is voluntary, everyone in the group is equal, regardless of whether one is poor or rich; educated or illiterate; young or old.
We set up our own rules to govern ourselves (self-rule). Because we are equal with one another, the principle that governs our relationship is the principle of democracy. No one dictates to the group, but rather that the group always decides things in consideration of the opinions or many.
When we form ourselves into an organization, we allow ourselves to be disciplined. Discipline means sacrifice. We allow this because we have a greater good in mind. The discipline in the group transfers to our individual life. We become more orderly in the way we do things because we reap the benefits of discipline. This is a discipline which is not imposed by someone else, but what I have chosen myself.
We learn what it is to cooperate and trust one another. We can help one another. We can learn new ways of doing things.
(d) Conclusion of synthesis
Facilitator writes the following phrases on the blackboard as she synthesizes the above
If we are organized:
- we are stronger
- can mobilize our own resources
- decision voluntary
- we are all equal
- we govern ourselves in a democratic way
- we are more disciplined
- life more orderly
- cooperate
- trust
- help one another
- learn new ways of doing things
6. Facilitator shows Visual Aid M 1 - 11: We Are One. She tells the group that the jars have different sizes, shapes and height, but there is unity.
Module 1
Topic 3
Activity 1
Visual Aid M 1-11
Visual Aid M 1-11: We are One
Topic 4: The importance of each person
Background and Rationale
This workshop from the very start has focused on the importance of each person. The principle of participation is based on the belief that each person has something unique to contribute. In the analysis of their situation, the women focused on among other things, their need to raise their own status as women. It is therefore logical that a deeper focus on the unique potentials and constraints of persons be made. In this Topic four aspects related to persons as foundation for good organization will be focused on namely (a) appreciating self and others, (b) communication, (c) cooperation and (d) trust. A reflection on these will give participants an understanding of what they need in the process of building their organization or group.
Output Objectives
After 7 hours participants would have experienced and learned lessons in the four important elements as basic foundation in group organization. More specifically participants will be able to:
1. Have a deeper appreciation of their own strengths and weakness; recall important moments in their lives and thereby deepen this appreciation of self;
2. Share their deepest thoughts and feelings and in the process appreciate each other more
3. Internalize essential elements of communication and the importance of good communication in organization building;
4. Internalize essential elements of cooperation and its importance in organization building;
5. Internalize the essential elements of trust and its importance in organization building.
Activity 1: Appreciating self and others
Time
2.5 hours
Methodology
Group dynamics /discussions/Lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1- 12; Guide Questions on newsprint
Material
"Life Cycle" Sheets cut in a circle with 20 cm diameter for each participant, staff and observer; multi-colored maker pens (I set per group); tape; scissors; extra newsprint for facilitator; chalks; blackboard.
Note for Facilitator
There are two Group Dynamics Exercises in this Activity.
Instruction for Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator explains that this Activity will focus on the importance of participants own capabilities, weaknesses, traits and potentials. That they will reflect not only on themselves, but that they will have an opportunity to discovery new aspects of the persons in the group. That this becomes a foundation in building their group as they count on each other's strengths and know how to support each other in their weakness. A sense of oneness could be achieved. Sharing one another's deepest thoughts is a contribution to building a group, more precious than any material things they could contribute.
3. VERY IMPORTANT: Monitor or facilitator should view this Activity as one of the most personal and almost intimate moments in the workshop and therefore should be very sensitive to what each person is trying to share. We must remember that it is difficulty to share personal things in a group. Monitor or Facilitator should therefore be encouraging and supportive. Nothing negative should come from the Facilitator and Monitors. Nothing but encouragement. Needless to say no one must be allowed to ridicule whatever is shared.
Experience in other workshops similar to this, shows that this Activity could result in women crying as they recall painful experiences associated with their weak moments in life. Facilitator should be able to manifest support and empathy by word, gesture or touch .
4. Since this the content of this Activity is rather personal it would be necessary to have subgroups of about 10-12 persons in each. This allows for the comfortable number for the dynamics of the group to produce the desired result. It is large enough so that participants feel the support and small enough that they will not feel fearful of speaking in a large group.
5. Facilitator posts the "Life Cycle" on newsprint as she introduces the .
6. Workshop staff distributes the "Life Cycle" sheets as the appropriate time, making sure that each one has one sheet. Provide one set of multi-colored pens for each group.
Task Instructions: "Life Cycle" Activity
This activity we are about to do is different from the other activities we have done previously in this workshop. The difference is that in this Activity we will share with one another something more personal with one another. Another difference is that this time, we will do the "Life Cycle" without the help of others. We will do this in silence to experience a moment of silence and solitude.
1. Kindly form yourselves in small groups with 10 members in each group.
2. For 10 minutes you are to go out of the workroom in silence and think about the 4 questions on the "Life Cycle" sheet. Think of a symbol of what you want to say and draw it under each question. The outdoors may give you inspiration for the symbols which you want to use. We want you to walk around in silence, to experience your own solitude and to collect your own thoughts without the help of others.
3. After 10 minutes, please come back to your groups. In the group, each one will take turns to share the meaning of her drawings on the "Life Cycle" sheet.
4. We encourage each one to share including the staff end observers.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
7. After you have given the Task Instructions give an example on how to accomplish the Activity. Below is an example which you could explain. You may want to do your own example.
EXAMPLE
Strength: symbol - bamboo tree - Explanation: I feel I am strong. My strength cannot be broken even by storms, like the bamboo tree. Gives an example of a specific incident in her life.
Weakness: symbol - Onion - Explanation: I cry easily. But I do not give up even if I am hurt. Gives an example of a specific incident in her life.
Most difficult Moment in my life: symbol - a rice bowl - Explanation: there was a time when .....(gives the month and year when my family had nothing to eat...gives more details).
Most beautiful Moment in My life: a symbol of a book - Explanation: When my daughter graduated from College, I felt very happy because the family worked very hard for this to happen. We had to overcome so many obstacles, because she is a girl. (Tells what her daughter has achieved...)
Instructions Facilitator (3)
8. After the 10 minutes sub-groups Facilitator divides the participants into three sub-groups of about 10 - 12 women in each group. There should be one facilitator or monitor available in each of the 3 sub-groups. Then the Facilitator or Monitor asks each one to volunteer and share what she has in her "Life Cycle" sheet. About 30-40 minutes or I hour should be given for this sharing period.
Instructions for Facilitator (4)
9. After the 40 minutes to I hour sharing among sub-groups, using the same groups Facilitator as the sub-groups to reflect on their experience on the "Life Cycle" Activity.
10. Ten minute break before the next .
Task Instructions: Reflection On the "Life Cycle" Activity
1. Kindly go back to your groups on "Life Cycle "Activity.
2. We will now reflect on what we have learned from this .
3. We will have 10 minutes for discussions. I have posted some Guide Questions for you.
4. After 10 minutes the Staff will distribute newsprint for you to draw a symbol of what you have discovered about yourselves and others in your group.
5. You will be given another 15 minutes for this part of the task.
Guide Questions
(On newsprint)
What have we learned from this Activity in terms of:
1. Our personal feelings about the Activity in general - Did we enjoy this Activity? Why?
2. Summarize:
What are the patterns or kinds of strength of character our members have?
What are the general weakness our members have?
What are the kinds of difficult moments our members have?
What kinds of beautiful moments our members have?
3. What does this mean in terms of establishing or building an organization?
Instructions for Facilitator (5)
No Summary needed. However, Facilitator should link her synthesis extensively with the Reflections of the group.
Synthesis: Important Points
It is difficult to share something personal. Each one has now contributed something intangible and precious to giving life to the group or the formation of our group. This is their first, perhaps most costly contribution in bonding the group. It is like glue which binds members to one another;
12. That we have needs beyond survival or material needs of food clothing and shelter which we need to fulfill, these are our need to develop our spiritual selves. When we share our deepest self we grow in appreciation of ourselves. We gain strength and confidence in the process.
13. That when we accept the gift of sharing of the deepest thoughts and feelings of others, we are enriched in a spiritual sense.
14. Each person with her strengths and weaknesses is the foundation of any organization. It is therefore important for each one to know these. Our strengths are what we can build our organization on. Knowing our weaknesses gives us a chance to become tolerant, since all of us have weakness and also then we know how to support one another. Knowing other deep feelings and background of other members, make us realize that we have the same aspirations in life and that we can really help one another.
Note: "spiritual" in the Chinese context are realities beyond the material.
Module 1
Topic 3
Activity 1
Visual Aid M 1-12
Visual Aid M 1-12: Life Cycle
Activity 2: Communication
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Group Dynamics / Discussion/Lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1-13; Visual Aid M 1 -14; Guide Questions on newsprint.
Materials
multi-colored marker pens (I set per group); tape; scissors; extra newsprint for facilitator; chalks; blackboard.
4 - 5 copies of M 1 - 13 to be used by small groups
On newsprint: The Message for "The Gossipers" Exercise
Note for the Facilitator
There are two Group Dynamics Exercises in this Activity.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator introduces this Activity by saying that:
In the previous Activity we had an opportunity to learn more about ourselves. As we shared our thoughts and feelings with others we also had an opportunity to learn and appreciate other members of the group. We learned to increase our own appreciation of ourselves and members of our group. These are the essential foundations for good organization. People or persons are an important foundation of organizations.
In this Activity, will we have an opportunity to reflect on important principles of communication. Communication is another important building block of organization. We will have some as a means to understand these important principles in communication.
First Group Dynamics Exercise 1 (GD -1): The Farm Scene
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
3. Time management is critical in this activity. It would even be useful if you have an alarm clock on the front desk. If not just use your watch but be exact about the time given to participants. When you are ready to start the GD Exercise, you have to say " Start" and at the end of ten minutes you say " Stop". This strict time management is intended to create a bit of more enthusiasm and excitement and more importantly, it challenges participants to be more imaginative and creative. If they are too relaxed, they will have a tendency to be lazy in thought.
4. No Group Reflection on lessons learned is needed after this GD Exercise. Wait until you finish the second GD Exercise.
Task Instructions: The Farm Scene
1. Form yourselves into new groups of 5 members in each group.
2. As soon as you have settled in your group, the Staff will distribute a picture to each group. When you receive the picture, please do not look at it until I tell you to do so. Put it face down. (Facilitator uses one copy of Visual Aid M l - 13: The Farm Scene, for each small group.)
3. I will give you only 10 minutes to look at the picture.
4. When you look at the picture each one of you tells the members of the group what she sees or finds in the picture. You take turns in doing this.
5. Assign one person to list down and report what the group has found.
6. This is a contest. At the end of 10 minutes, we will find out which group has found the most in the picture.
Second Group Dynamics Exercise: The Gossipers
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
5. Workshop Staff arranges l 0 chairs in a straight line. Leave about l foot space between chairs. If there are not chairs, use desks. Not more than 2 persons per desk. Also put these desks in a straight line. It would be good to do this outside in the court yard.
6. Facilitator asks for 10 volunteers. Asks them to sit on the chairs. Ask the rest of the group to pay close attention to the whole process.
7. Facilitator tells the volunteers that she will whisper a message to the first volunteer at one end of the line and that this message must be passed on to the next one in a whisper. Make sure the others do not hear. Only the next person should hear. Message must be transmitted no matter how stupid it sounds.
The Message
I saw Xiao Cai with her 2 children and 3 pigs go to market. One of the pigs was walking with the first child and the other was carried by Xiao Cai. When they reached the market, Xiao Cai sold the pig that walked with her. She bathed her second child in the nearby ever.
8. After the tenth person receives the message, Facilitator asks her to tell the group what she got from the 9th person. Facilitator then posts a newsprint which contains the message she whispered to the first volunteer.
9. Generally at this stage the volunteers will probably be trying to tell the person they whispered to that that was not what she said. Etc. Allow them to have fun !
Task Instructions: Group Discussion on the 2 GD Exercises
1. We will now reflect on the lessons we learned from these two GD Exercises.
2. Remain in your groups.
3. I will give you Guide Questions.
4. Please have your discussions and list down the lessons you have learned from these two GD Exercises.
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
1. What lessons in communication did we learn from GD No. 1: The Farm Scene?
2. What lessons in communication did we learn from GD No.2: The Gossipers
3. What are some principles in communication
- about the message
- about the sender of the message
- about the receiver of the message
4. Are there situations in real life similar to the "Gossipers"? What are its dangers?
5. Why is good communication important in an organization?
Instructions for Facilitator (5)
10. Facilitator summarizes outputs of the participants through their group reports, using the Guide Questions as headings of the summary.
Synthesis: Important Points
11. Facilitator synthesizes, using Visual Aid M 1 - 14.
(a) The Farm Scene - Lessons in Different Perceptions of the Same Thing
1. Different people have different perceptions of even something which looks on the surface the same such as this picture.
2. Our perception of things are sometimes influenced by our own life experience (example of those who saw animals means that this is familiar to them; those who saw numbers perhaps are familiar with this reality in their work; etc.)
3. In an organization we have to appreciate each other's perceptions of life situation because we have different life experience which color our perceptions and our opinions.
4. The best way to communicate is to use the receiver's life experience to give the message. This will be understood more easily. For example, if I use examples about vegetables among vegetable growers it would be easier to understand each other. If I use examples about coconut growing in the northwest of China where they have no coconut, I will have a harder time in communicating.
(b) The Gossipers - Lessons of the Importance of Sender and Receiver of Message
1. We need to pay very close attention to the message being given. If we are able to ask questions we would be able to understand the message better. Our first volunteer did not ask questions from the Facilitator. The Facilitator thought that she under stood the message. We need to ask questions if we are not clear about a message.
2. When a message is passed on through several persons, often times these are no longer the same as the original message. WE can sometimes create problems for others if we talk about delicate matters which we heard from someone without checking the truth about this information.
3. When we are nervous we tend not to get the message correctly. We also have a tendency not give the message correctly when we are nervous. I our relationship with one another therefore, it is important to be supportive because if we feel that someone appreciate us, we are able to communicate better.
12. Facilitator then uses Visual Aid M 1 - 14 to show the basic elements in Communication. Facilitator uses the following material as background. She therefore should study this material ahead of time and make her own notes. She should enhance this material with examples from participants and her own experience. She should not lecture this material like reading from a book. Participants will not understand and will get bored, if you do this. No learning will happen.
Factors which Influence Communication
There are three major elements in communication, namely the sender the one who gives the message; the message or the instructions given; and the receiver or the one who was receiving the message. Some factors which influence communication are:
(a) The method of communication
There are two methods. We communicate verbally or non-verbally. During the two GD Exercises we just did, we were perhaps more aware of when participants were talking to one another. This is verbal communication. But perhaps we missed a lot of the non-verbal communication going on. For example did we realize how nervous (name one person) was. She was communicating her apprehension or concern that she would like to do her best but that she is nervous that she might not be able to do so. Another example of nonverbal communication is the apparent enthusiasm the group had in participating in the Exercise. The message given is that we are happy doing this Exercise together. Another non verbal communication is through touch. How many times I have seen many of you give a nudge or touch another to encourage her to participate.
Verbal - where message is transmitted by word of mouth.
Non-Verbal - where message is transmitted consciously or unconsciously using body language or signal to convey message.
(b) Factors which facilitate effective communication
Immediate feedback
This occurs when both sender and receiver are able to clarify a message if one does not understand the other. When we appreciate each other enough to be able to tell one another our faults so that we can correct ourselves.
Two-way communication
This implies that each person is respected as equal to all and therefore communication is two ways not just one way.
Use of appropriate channels
In the context of a group, open and fruitful discussions in regular meetings; keeping minutes of meetings are some examples of appropriate channels of communication.
Understanding communication culture
The sender should needs to understand the culture of the receiver of the message. For example, illiterates have a different culture of communication compared to those who are literate. We therefore need to adjust to each other's culture.
13. Facilitator emphasizes the importance of good communication in an organization. Important points in establishing and maintaining good communication in our organization are:
(a) It creates a supportive atmosphere in an organization;
(b) It creates an open and trustful atmosphere in an organization;
(c) Talents and new ideas are shared easily;
(d) It allows members to make mistakes and the opportunity to learn from their mistakes because they are able to talk about these mistakes and learn from them;
(e) An organization functions effectively and productively.
Module 1
Topic 4
Activity 2
Visual Aid M 1-13
Visual Aid M 1-13: A Form Scene
Module 1
Topic 4
Activity 2
Visual Aid M 1-14
Visual Aid M 1-14: Communication
Activity 3: Cooperation
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Group Dynamics/Discussion/Lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1 - 15; Visual Aid M 1- 16; Guide Questions
Materials
Materials as in Visual Aid M 1 - 15 in the following quantities: 2-pieces of cartolina and newsprint per sub-group; one pair of scissors per group; one bottle of paste per sub-group; 23 one set of multi-colored marker pens per groups; one roll of tape per sub-group.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator introduces the Activity as follows:
This part of the training is still focused on the importance of persons in organization. In the two previous Activities we learned lessons on how important it is to have a deeper knowledge of oneself and other members in the group. We also learned of the importance of good communication to be able to manage oneself as part of an organization. In this part of the training, we will deepen our insights into the nature of cooperation as another important element in building and maintaining the life of a group or an organization
3. Facilitator assigns 3 persons among monitors and observers to be judges for the contest among groups for the Tower Building. Criteria: the tallest, most beautiful, most original and stable tower. There should be a first, second and third price winner.
Task Instructions: Building a Tower (Cooperation)
1. Form yourselves into new groups of 7 members in each group.
2. We will have a contest among groups. Each group will build a tower, using materials which you need to "buy" from our "store keeper" Ms according exchange value or "price" on our Supply Checklist on the newsprint.
3. You will be given 45 minutes to build your tower. I will be very strict about the time, since this is a contest.
4. The criteria for the winner at the end of 45 minutes are the following:
 efficient use of resources
 effective use of talents
 tallest tower
 most beautiful tower
 most stable tower
5. If your neighbor catches you in copying their design, they are allowed to choose a material you already have
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
4. During the activity, monitors and trainers observe the sub-groups, noting the following:
(a) agreed plan
(b) individual tasks assigned
(c) who participates... all?
(d) creativity
(e) communication (how)
(f) leadership
(g) effective use of talents
(h) efficient use of resources
5. These observations will be imputed into the summary and synthesis of the facilitator.
6. At the end of 45 minutes, the judges review the finished tower and declares the winners.
Task Instructions: Group Discussion on Reflection of Lessons Learned
1. Remain in your groups.
2. We will now reflect on lessons we have learned from the GD Exercise on cooperation. Please discuss among yourselves, using Guide Questions I have on newsprint for 15 minutes.
3. Each group should assign one person to report to the larger group.
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
What lessons have we learned from this GD Exercise about cooperation, particularly as
regards:
1. Did you have a plan? If not did you waste time because you had no plan in the beginning? If there is a plan, is it easier to have everyone's cooperation?
2. How did you use your material resources? Could you have done so more efficiently and not waste them? How?
3. How did you use the talents in the group? Was it easier if there was a plan from the beginning to use the talents in the group? Did you learn new things about members in your group?
4. What lessons did you learn about leadership in the group?
5. What lessons did you learn about sacrifice?
6. From this experience, what are the 3-4 important elements of cooperation should we have when we organize ourselves?
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
7. Facilitator summarizes results of group discussion using the headings below.
Planning
Use of materials
Use of talents
Participation
Leadership Sacrifices made
Synthesis: Important Points
8 Facilitator synthesizes emphasizing important points below, but drawing from examples from the summary and the experience during the GD Exercise. Cooperation is effective and useful in an organization if:
(a) There are clear goals in an organization which everyone agrees to. Like having a plan in this GD Exercise, it was easier to have everybody do their share because there was a plan. Funds were used efficiently because there was a plan. No-waste.
(b) Members are willing to make sacrifices;
(c) Members are committed, enthusiastic, creative and efficient in the use of time, talents in the group and resources in accomplishing the task.
(d) Members realize the importance of the needed intangible foundation of organization. This comes in the form of good and effective relationships among members, who are willing to make sacrifices, trust one another end provide a supportive atmosphere for member's talents to be used effectively.
Module 1
Topic 4
Activity 3
Visual Aid M 1-15
Visual Aid M 1 -15: List of Items and Prices
Materials
Price
Personal
Items
Price
Cartolina
Shoes 1.5
Newsprint
Socks 1.5
Scissors
Sweater
String 2.00
Belt
Paste 5.00
Handkerchief
marker Pen
Ring
Crayons
Necklace
Tape 1.00
Wristwatch
Eyeglasses
Slippers
Module 1
Topic 4
Activity 3
Visual Aid M 1-16
Visual Aid M 1-16: Cooperation
Activity 4: Trust
Time
1 hour
Methodology
Group Dynamics/Discussion/Lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 1-17; Guide Questions
Materials
6 scarfs (3 for blindfolding 3 volunteers and 3 for tying their hands of each of the 3 volunteers.) ; some string to tie the one leg of each of the 3 volunteers; multi-colored marker pens (I set per group); tape; scissors; extra newsprint for facilitator; chalks; blackboard.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator introduces the activity as follows:
Trust is another important element in building and maintaining an organization. It is a situation where one or several persons commit (s) her or their well-being to another because she or they believe that other person or persons will safeguard the interests of the group. There will be many situations in the functioning of an organization where persons will need to trust one another. We will have an activity which could bring us insights into this important element in organization.
Task Instructions: Group Dynamics - Blind Fold
1. I need 12 volunteers from the group to participate in the Activity.
2. I need 6 volunteers in Group I and 6 volunteers in Group 2.
3. Kindly go in pairs.
4. Three persons in Group 1 will be blind folded; 3 persons will also be blind folded in Group 2.
5. One leg of the blind persons in group 2 will be tied with a string so that these three blind folded persons will only be able to walk with one leg.
6. Those who are not handicapped in the six pairs will act as Guide to those who are handicapped.
7. The rest of the participants will be observers.
8. We will now go outside and each Guide is to bring her handicapped friend with her and walk around through obstacles prepared by the staff.
9. We have 15 minutes for this Exercise.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
3. Please be mindful about accidents. You can prepare obstacles but these should not be too difficult that accidents could occur.
4. After the Exercise Facilitator assembles all participants in the work room. She asks for Feedback from the volunteers as follows:
First Group: Blind Folded and those with tied legs
Guide Questions:
Did you trust your Guide? At what point were you afraid?
How did your Guide reassure you? Verbally or non-verbally?
Second Group: Blind Folded Only
Guide Questions:
Did you trust your Guide? At what point were you afraid?
How did your Guide reassure you? Verbally or non-verbally?
Third Group: Guides of Blind Folded and those with tied legs
Guide Questions:
What were your feelings and thoughts as you were guiding your disabled friend?
When did you think your friend was most afraid? How did she manifest this?
How did you reassure her?
Fourth Group: Guides of Blind Folded only
Guide Questions:
What were your feelings and thoughts as you were guiding your disabled friend?
When did you think your friend was most afraid? How did she manifest this?
How did you reassure her?
Instructions for Facilitator (4)
5. After the above sharing session, with volunteers, we can now have a group discussion.
Task Instructions: Group Discussion - Reflection on the Trust
Group Dynamics Exercise
1. Form yourselves into groups of 7 members in each group.
2. For I minutes kindly reflect on lessons we have learned from this GD Exercise.
3. There are Guide Questions on the newsprint.
4. A member in your group should report the results of your discussions after 15 minutes.
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
1. What doe trust mean?
2. What did you learn from the exercise ?
3. What is the significance of trust for the women's groups ?
Instructions for Facilitator (5)
6. Facilitator summarizes the results of discussions using the Guide Questions a headings.
Synthesis: Important Points
7. Facilitator synthesizes the experience and the results of the group discussions. Emphasize the following important points:
(a) Trust is like a bridge
Trust is a basic underlying principle in organization building. Trust is like a bridge which allows persons in an organization to be able to transact business and relate with one another. Without this bridge there would be no way that this relationship or business dealings could happen.
(b) Trust needs to be maintained
Even if group members know each other well, and have trusted each other, the continuous process of building trust is important. It is an on-going process. Effective communication is important to help build this trust.
(c) We need to trust ourselves first
One has to trust oneself first, before one can truly trust others. Trust is directly related to self-appreciation and being able to share with one another.
Use Visual Aid M 1 - 17 to end this session.
Module 1
Topic 4
Activity 4
Visual Aid M 1-17
Visual Aid M 1-17: Trust (Jars)
Topic 5: Synthesis of module 1
Time
1 hour
Methodology
Group Discussion/Lecture-dialogue
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aids:
M1-3:
Summary of Expectations
M 1- 4:
Agreement of Participation
M1-8:
"8 Golden Steps" (Task Flow)
M 1 - 9:
Roots, Indications and Consequences of Women's Low
Status
M 1 - 9 A:
The Broken Jar
M 1 - 10
Approaches in Raising Women's Status
M 1 - 10 A:
The Whole Jar
M 1-11:
We Are One
M 1-12:
Life Cycle Activity
M 1-14:
Communication
M 1-16:
Cooperation
M 1-17:
Trust
M 1 - 18:
Synthesis of Module I
Materials
multi-colored marker pens (l set per group); tape; scissors; extra newsprint for facilitator; chalks; blackboard.
Instructions Facilitator (1)
2. Facilitator emphasize the following points on Why it is Important to Reflect:
(a) Reflection deepens learning
We need to reflect back on what we have covered and accomplished . This process of reflection can deepen our knowledge and understanding of what we have learned.
(b) Reflection helps in linking with next steps
We need to look forward to the next Module. It is like building a house. We have now built or accomplished the foundation in Module 1. We now have to think on how to build the next part of the house.
Use of Visual Aids
3. Facilitator uses the Visual Aids when she makes the synthesis after the group discussion. These are posted before the Activity begins, so that the participants can refer to them during their discussions.
Task Instructions: Reflections on Module I
1. As I said earlier we need to reflect on what we have covered and learned in Module 1. We will have group discussions to do this.
2. Form yourselves into small groups of 7 members in each group.
3. I will give you Guide Questions for your discussions. Groups discussions will be for 15 minutes. Write down your ideas.
4. After 15 minutes the Staff will go around to give you one newsprint per group and some marker pees. You will be given another 15 minuses to represent your ideas in drawings.
5. When you get the newsprint make 3 divisions on the newsprint. You will need this as you present the results of your discussions according to the Guide Questions.
6. After this second 15 minutes one of your members should present your outputs to the larger group.
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
1. The key principle or philosophy of this workshop is participation. List down the different ways of participation during this workshop. Use the Visual Aids which are on the wall, to help you remember.
2. List 2 - 3 Activities which you liked best. Give reasons why you liked them.
3. List down 2 - 3 important points which you learned in Module 1. Give reasons why they are important to you.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
4. Facilitator makes notes on the blackboard as the group make their presentations. She uses the following headings for her notes.
Ways of Participation
Liked best/why
Learned most/why important
Synthesis: Important Points
5. Facilitator reviews the important outputs of the participants. She points to pertinent sections on the Visual Aids from time to time.
6. Facilitator emphasize the following:
(a) Importance of Participation
Participation has shown us that we are rich in experience as a group. We have proven to ourselves that we can share responsibilities if we believe in this principle (gives examples of how some of the illiterates had very good ideas curing the discussions; Task Groups shared in tasks for the workshop). We have learned how to treat each other equally, because we realize that each one of us has a unique contribution to make, regardless of background. We have learned to work in a democratic way by listening to what each one has to say and in supporting each other so that our talents are used for the benefit of the group (example in Activity on Cooperation). Let us review our " Agreement of Participation" and see where we can still improve ourselves. (Facilitator takes time and assess the situation. Encourage participants to participate more. Makes points where she thinks she as Facilitator can improve and where Monitors can improve).
(b) Importance of Analyzing Our Situation
We learned that in order to improve ourselves we need to honestly and clearly identify the root causes of our problems. In the Activity on "My Village Today" we were able to identify the Root Causes, Indications and Consequences of why we women have low status. (Facilitator focuses on what the group has emphasized as the priority problems among those listed in the Visual Aid). But we were not discouraged. We identified areas where we feel we can make changes, when we did the Activity on "My Village 5 Years From Now". (Facilitator uses Visual Aids M 1 - 09 and M 1 - 10, and highlights the priorities of the group among those listed).
(c) Importance of Organizing Into a Group
We gained new insights as to why we need to organize ourselves. That in order to achieve our "dream village" the priority step is to organize ourselves. Our determination has been increased to establish an organization which we voluntarily organize ourselves to meet needs which we ourselves have identified, rather than belonging to an organization which has been formed by others for us. We realize that if we do this we can now be stronger, because we are no longer alone, but working with other who have the same aspirations. We are able to mobilize our own resources and talents and acquire the capability to manage resources from the outside. If we are organized voluntarily and treating each one equally, we can govern ourselves democratically. We can still more disciple in our lives, since we will have to learn how to work with each other in cooperation and trust. We will be able to learn new ways of doing things from one another and we will be able to help one another in a
more systematic way.
(d) Importance of Each Person
If we have to establish an organization which meets our own needs and which we ourselves will manage, it is important to reflect on our own strengths and weakness. As we shared our most difficult and most beautiful moment in life, we shared out deepest thoughts and feelings with one another. As we reflected on these we gained new insights about ourselves and others in the group. We had a new appreciation of ourselves as well as others in the group. As we shared this through our "Life Cycle" sheets we exercised trust with our fellow members in the group. We trusted them enough to hear our personal thoughts and share our feelings. This was our first most precious contribution to the building of our group. This is a contribution which is priceless. A deeper bond has been established among ourselves.
We further learned various aspects of three most important elements in organization building; namely good communication, cooperation and trust. We enjoyed ourselves in the various GD exercises and we learned important lessons from these experiences:
We learned that good communication is essential in maintaining a health organization. That we can communicate our support for one another verbally and non-verbally. That we must be careful about passing on messages or conversations which could destroy our organization (Facilitator recalls the results of discussions in the GD Exercise: The Gossipers").
We learned of the importance of Cooperation as another intangible foundation of good organization. That if we have good cooperation we are able to arrive at establishing clear goals for ourselves. Members are able to commit themselves to the working of the organization with enthusiasm and creativity. Talents and other resources are utilized to benefit the group. We do not waste resources. (Facilitator recalls some specific examples from the GD Exercise: Tower Building).
We learned how important trust is in an organization . It is like a bridge which allows persons in an organization to be able to transact business and relate with one another. Without this bridge there would be no way that this relationship or business dealings could happen.
Even if group members know each other well, and have trusted each other, the continuous process of building trust is important. It is an on-going process. Effective communication is important to help build this trust.
Module 1
Topic 5
Visual Aid M 1-18
Visual Aid M 1-18: Synthesis of Module 1
Participation
- Self- introduction
- Workshop method
- Contract of Participation
- Participant Task Groups
My Village Today
Roots, Indications, Consequences of Women's Low Status
My Village 5 Years From Now
Approaches in Raising Women's Status
Why organize ourselves
- we are stronger;
- mobilize own resources
- voluntary; equal; united
- govern ourselves; democratic
- more disciplined
- help one another
-learn new ways
Self and Others
- shared my thoughts and feelings
- my most precious contribution
- more appreciation of self
- more appreciation of others
- we are enriched
Communication
- open and trusting
- respect of others
- sensitive to culture of others
- feedback - two-way
- verbal and non-verbal channels
Cooperation
- another intangible foundation
- clear goal
- commitment; enthusiastic
- use of talents in group
- effective use of resources
- regular assessment to reach goal
Trust
- like a bridge from self to others
- continuous process to build
- must trust self first
<section>6</section>
Module 2: Organizational mechanics
Topic 1: Group capital fund and the project revolving fund
Activity 1: Concepts of savings
Activity 2: Mutual assistance through savings and loan operation
Activity 3: Determining our savings capacity
Activity 4: Group policies and procedures
Activity 5: Group capital fund and the project revolving fund
Topic 2: Basic elements of a functioning organization
Activity 1: Goal setting
Activity 2: Objectives setting
Activity 3: Leadership styles
Activity 4: Group organizational structure
Activity 5: Dudes and responsibilities of officers
Activity 6: Group decision-making
Activity 7: WG policies and procedures
Activity 8: WG regular meetings
Topic 3: Synthesis of module 2
Module 2: Organizational mechanics
Module 2: Organizational mechanics
MODULE 2: VISUAL AIDS AND CASES
M 2 - 1
Lessons Learned from the Women of Malang Indonesia
Two Concepts of Savings
Mutual Assistance Through Savings and Loan Operation
Illustration: Group Savings Mobilization (Part 1)
Illustration: Group Savings Mobilization (Part 2)
My Savings Level and Source
Consolidated Group Savings
Sample: Group Lending Procedures
Terms and Conditions of Group Project Loan
Terms and Conditions of Individual Project Loan
Illustration: Relationship: Group Savings and Project Loan
Savings Mobilization and Utilization
Marker: Savings and Loan Operation
Goal Setting: Review of Lessons Learned From Module 1
Sample: Group Goal, Principle, Spirit and Motto
Draft: Group Objectives
Consolidated Group Objectives
Organizational Structure: Model I
Organizational Structure: Model 2
Duties and Responsibilities of Group Officers
Considerations: Good Group Decision
Considerations: How to Make Our Group Life Grow
Draft: Qualification/Requirements of Group Members
Draft: Savings Procedure
Draft: Social Development Commitment
Important Elements of a WG Meeting
WG Standard Agenda
Marker: Synthesis for Module 2
Case
I
A Story of Self Reliance: A Spoonful of Rice
Role Playing - Madame A
Role Playing - Madame B
Role Playing - Madame C
Wang Lan's Problem
MODULE 2: ORGANIZATIONAL MECHANICS
Introduction
In Module 1 participants had an opportunity to examine three important aspects related to project goals namely (a) outcomes in Situation Analysis which resulted in the identification of Roots, Indications and Consequences of Rural Women's Low Status and Approaches in Raising Women's Situation; (b) organizing themselves as a group to meet their own goals to raise their status; (c) the importance of persons as basic foundation in organization.
In Module 2 entitled Organizational Mechanics, participants will focus on the requirements in actualizing their organization by examining matters related to its mechanics. Various activities are designed to tackle how the goals, objectives, policies and procedures of organized WGs are evolved by the participants.
The foundation of an organization designed to enhance self-reliance is savings mobilization and utilization. The experience in mobilizing themselves for this purpose gives them the basic capacities to be able to use the project revolving fund which will be made available to them after 6-8 months of group savings and loan operation.
Participants will be guided by the staff to develop the various tools for making their organization operational in this workshop. Commitment to what they have developed will be sought during this workshop as well.
Output Objectives
By the end of 24-25 hours, participants will have:
1. Internalized the importance of savings mobilization and utilization as both an economic and social tool for self-reliance;
2. Understood the terms and conditions of the project revolving fund as another tool for self-reliance, more specifically to augment their resources in order to improve their income and skill in managing micro-enterprises;
3. Established the goals and specific objectives for their specific women's group which they are in the process of forming (a 6-month period and a 3-year period);
4. Established the policies and procedures governing the activities of their WG;
5. Internalized the importance of appropriate leadership style for their needs and gained initial understanding of the process of decision-making as a group;
6. Established appropriate organizational structure for their specific Women's Group (WG); and defined the duties and responsibilities of their officers..
Topic 1: Group capital fund and the project revolving fund
Background/Rationale
Building up the Group Capital Fund through group savings mobilization and utilization is both an economic and social tool for self-reliance. It can bring together the strengths of each one to create a force. As an economic tool, a group could build up a capital fund which otherwise cannot be attained if done individually. As a social tool it demands discipline from individuals because a consciousness and habit need to develop among members of a group. This process serves as a proof of each one's seriousness of being a member of a group, because money is one of the more valuable possession of the poor. The combination of deepened commitment to the group through their hard earned savings, the tangible benefits that they are able to attain and the gradual process of realization of their own power, results in sustainability.
Output Objectives
By the end of 9.5 - 10 hours, participants will have:
1. Internalized the importance of savings mobilization and utilization as a tool for self-reliance;
2. Committed themselves to the terms and conditions decided by the group in savings mobilization and utilization or the build up of the Group Capital Fund.
3. Developed and committed themselves to their organizational goals; articulated the principle and spirit which they want to prevail in their WG;
4. Developed and committed themselves to Objectives to achieve their goals (6-month period and 3-year period);
5. Developed and committed themselves to Policies and Procedures to govern their operations, in relation to their goals and objectives as a group;
6. Understood and accepted the terms and conditions of the Project Revolving Fund and the relationship of this fund to their Group Capital Fund.
Activity 1: Concepts of savings
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Case Study/ Discussion / Lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Module 2 Case 1: A Story of Self-Reliance - A Spoonful of Rice
Ask one or two volunteers to study this case a head of time, so that they can read this material before the group on the day this Activity will be discussed.
Visual Aids M 2 - 1; Visual Aid M 2 - 2.
Materials
marker pens, newsprint.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this Activity by saying that we are now into the second part of the workshop programme. She repeats the objectives of Module 2 which she would have written on a newsprint before this Activity. Among the objectives of this Module, she points to objective No. 1. She further explains that we will have several Activities to be able to achieve this workshop objective.
2. Facilitator asks participants to read this story. Two or three participants may be asked to volunteer. Facilitator instructs participant volunteer to read slowly. Ask them to make it interesting, so others will listen.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
3. After the reading of the Story, Facilitator asks participants to form themselves into small groups of 5 members in each sub-group. They discuss what they have learned from this story, using the Guide Questions below. A member from the sub-group should report to the larger group after 15 minutes discussion. Use Visual Aid M 2 - 1.
4. Each sub-group presents their output.
5. Facilitator summarizes on blackboard or newsprint, the report of the sub-groups according to the above questions. Facilitator should not add her own thoughts at this stage. It is important for participants to see what they themselves have accomplished in terms of results of their own reflections.
6. Facilitator synthesizes. This means referring to the group output and adding your own thoughts and relating this to the principle of self-reliance. Note that there are 2 parts in the Synthesis. The first part draws lessons from the Case itself. The second part is a presentation of principles of Savings Mobilization.
Synthesis 1: Important Pointers
(a) Must savings be always in money form?
Savings does not necessarily mean money, but it can also be material such as rice in this story which can be converted in money later on.
(b) What Obstacles did they encounter....?
Self
If I say to myself " I cannot do it because I am poor" it is like putting prison bars around myself. Like the women in the story, in the beginning most of them felt their helplessness. But Mrs. Hartati believed in herself and in the women in the group.
Some women sometimes forgot to save the spoon-full of rice. It took time to form the habit. But they had a decision and in spite of their failures in the beginning, they were able to do so eventually. They supported each other when they failed.
Others
In the story, the women's husbands laughed at them, because it seemed silly to be saving such small amounts of rice.
It took a long time to he able to accumulate enough money in the beginning.
(c) How obstacles were overcome
A few women (Mrs. Suharti, Sri and Hartati) became conscious of their situation and had an analysis of what they need and what they want to change and how;
Individual decision is important.
Continuously followed group decision, even when discouraged;
Supported each other, wing their weekly meeting to gather strength from each other,
No matter how small their savings, when put together these came out to be of a substantial amount which they used to help one another start a business;
(d) Self-Reliant? Why?
Yes, because:
they believed in themselves and their own potentials;
they identified their own problems; were realistic in their solutions by doing things step by step (started small and gradually became bigger);
they were patient and persevering, especially in the beginning;
they believed in the power of the group where they helped one another;
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
Synthesis 2: Concepts of Savings
7. Facilitator enhances the knowledge of the group as follows:
When a group decides to save to build up their own capital fund, this becomes an effective tool to get rich, even for the poor. Savings are resources which one decides to put aside for investment purposes and not for luxury. Remember the women in Malang village in Indonesia. Let us examine two concepts of saving and see which one applies to what the women did in that village.
Use Visual Aid M2 -2.
8. Facilitator asks group which of the models applies to the women in Malang village in Indonesia.
Answer: Model B
Model B has made a decision to save. This is the key. A decision has been made and therefore the woman in the example above consciously protects the decision to save the Yuan 50.
Factors which can affect savings mobilization:
 Savings depend on income. Theoretically, more income means more capacity to save. But without a decision this may not be so.
 Saving consciousness/willingness is decided not by income, but by decision and forming a habit. A person can have a little income, but if she has decided to save and form the habit, she will have more savings than the person with a higher income who has not decided to save.
 Savings depend on the determination/persistence of a person to get out of poverty.
 Savings depend on factors such as family size, slack period in the agricultural season.
 By saving as a group, it is easier to make savings a habit. We seem to be helped by the fact that there are others who are doing the same thing we do and that together we are able to do things better.
 Savings deposited in the group fund is not as easily spent as when I save and keep myself; I am able to participate in the benefits from the group since I can borrow from the group fund and benefit from ideas and get encouragement from the group;
 By saving in the group, each member is equal to every one and because membership is voluntary, each one therefore has equal right in decision making on how the savings will be utilized.
 The savings fund belongs to the group and therefore members are the only ones who can decide on how this will he used.
9. Facilitator ends this session by saying that the participants should now start to think of whether they really want to form themselves as a group. Their resolve will now be tested in that. if they want to form themselves into a group, they would have to show the* seriousness by deciding as a group how much they will save monthly? And whether they can do this consistently like the women of Malang for a period of say 4 - 6 months.
Module 2: Case 1 A Story of Self-Reliance: A Spoon-full of Rice
In a poor village at the coast of Indonesia called Malang, men were engaged in fishing and women in selling the fish catch. The profits were very low. The men can only fish 5 months in the year and every year their catch is getting smaller. Other big fishermen use dynamite and the small fish cannot grow. Because of this situation, the women feel the poverty more severely because every day they have to figure out how to feed the family. They also do not have enough money to send their children to school.
One day Mrs. Suharti and Mrs. Sri were talking as they were washing their clothes in a river, about their situation and their aspirations in life. They were talking about how thin their children were. That Mrs. Suharti's girl child had to drop out of school because they have not money. Both women said they do not want to have children anymore. Mrs. Suharti said she is using pills and Mrs. Sri said she is using IUD. Both were happy about the contraceptive method they have chosen.
They were happy just to be able to talk, but what got them excited was that they had the same idea about doing something about their situation. Both of them want to raise ducks so that they could sell this and have some profit. They said that they feel they have potentials as business women, not just washing clothes and taking care of their children and husband. But their enthusiasm was cut short when they both realize that they do not have enough money to start this duck raising business.
Many days passed and each of them could not forget the nice feeling which they had about wanting to have a business. She would talk to other women in the village. To their surprise there are 20-25 women in the village who feel the same problem and who have the same aspirations.
One day Mrs. Suharti and Mrs. Sri invited all these women to the court yard of Mrs. Sri's house and they had a meeting. Their objective was to find a solution for the problem which seems to be the same for everybody.
Mrs. Hartati said that she had heard that there is a group of women in another village who formed themselves into a group and together they raised their own funds. They agreed that each one save a certain amount each week. This is collected, and as soon as the amount is big enough, one or two of the members would borrow it and buy some chickens. After a period those who borrowed would return the money to the group. Then the others would take turns to do the same. They choose the business activity which they want to engage in.
But the group looked very sad. There was no reaction to Mrs. Hartati's idea. Mrs. Susrini said that how can they save when they are so poor. That is the reason why they cannot engage in business. But Mrs. Hartati was not discouraged. She was convinced that the solution in to be found in their own strength. She pursued her idea and said to the group, that perhaps they should analyze their situation and look at what resources they have. She said all of us cook and eat rice every day. What if we save a spoon-full of rice every day. That should not be so difficult. She was so energetic and enthusiastic about the idea. After a while several women began to say, " Yes I can do that". The room became so noisy after awhile because everyone became very excited.
After a while the women decided as a group to save a spoon - full of rice every day when cooking. Every two weeks they collected the rice. After three months they sold the rice they have saved and lent it to 2-3 women who bought a pair of ducks each. They took turns in borrowing the money. They also made money selling duck eggs. They used this to  buy more ducks.
During the first 6 months they encountered so many obstacles,. Their husbands laughed at them. Sometimes they would forget to save the rice. In come case, the husband came home one day and he was so hungry, he cooked the saved rice. But the women would meet every week and tell each other their experience. Sometimes they would laugh at their experience and sometimes, they would tell each other how discouraged they are. But because they are a group, they supported each other and encouraged one another.
After 2 years this group of 22 women have not only duck raising as a business, but they also fatten goats (Moslem community) and plant papaya. All this is sold. Their husbands are not laughing at them any more. They have gained a new respect from their husbands and the community leaders.
Now after 10 years, the group has 300 members and more than 350 million yuan as their capital fund.
Visual Aid No. M 2-1
On Newsprint Lessons Learned from the Women of Malang Village Indonesia
What have we learned from the story:
(a) Must savings be always in money form?
In my present situation, if I have decided to save how do I do this?
(b) What obstacles did the group encounter once they had their decision?
(in themselves from others outside the group)
In your situation, what are your constraints?
(c) How did they overcome their problems?
How will you overcome yours?
(d) Are they self-reliant? Why?
Visual Aid M 2 - 2
Concepts of Savings
Model A - Old Concept:
Saving is everything that is not spent.
In this situation we would say that:
Income minus expenditure equals savings
Model B - New Concept:
Savings is the amount I decide to put aside for
Investment purposes and not for luxury.
In this situation we would say:
Income minus savings equals expenditures
Example:
Model A:
100 yuan income - 80 yuan expenditure = 20 yuan savings
Model B:
100 yuan income - 50 yuan savings = 50 yuan expenditures
Activity 2: Mutual assistance through savings and loan operation
Time
1 hour
Methodology
Discussion/ lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 2 - 3.
Materials
marker pens; newsprint.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by refreshing the memory of the participants on the women of Malang Village in Indonesia, on how they used savings they mobilized to engage in duck raising and later on in other types of business. We also learned by illustration, the difference between the old and new concept of savings. That if we want to really be self-reliant like the women of Malang Indonesia we would have to adopt the new concept of savings.
In this Activity we will examine the factors that affect savings mobilization.
Task Instructions
2. Facilitator forms sub-groups of 4-5 women.
3. Sub-groups discuss for 20 minutes with the following guide questions:
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
(a) What are the advantages of saving as a group?
(b) Why is it important to use the savings fund for members to borrow ?
(c) Why should loans be for only investments which would generate income rather than for luxury purposes, such as weddings?
(d) Why should interest be charged?
(e) Why should penalty be charged?
4. The sub-groups report to the large group.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
5. Facilitator summarizes the results of group discussion emphasizing the points in Visual Aid M 2 - 3.
Visual aid M 2 - 3 Mutual Assistance Through Savings And Loan Operation
1. Advantages of saving a group
 Members together can accumulate a capital fund faster. Cite the example in the previous activity;
 It is easier to form the habit of savings if a person commits herself to do so; We get more ideas from others as we associate with them in a group;
 Each person manifests her seriousness in being a member in a group because saving means sacrifice;
 Members learn how to manage themselves as a group;
 This is one way to prove to ourselves that we are self- reliant, since we are not depending on others to take care of our needs.
2. Why it is important to loan out savings for productive activities or income generation
 we do not allow members to borrow for activities which do not generate income, so that they will improve their family income; they can pay back easier because they have generated income (in luxurious activities we do not generate income, we simply spend);
 Member with increased income can contribute more savings to the group;
 More savings in the group means that more women can have loans and the loans can be bigger;
 Individual members increase their knowledge and skill in managing their business; increase her confidence in herself;
 this is one way that women can show the family her own potential;
 the group gain a new positive image in the community.
3. Why it is important to charge interest
 By charging interest on loans taken (e.g. I % a month), we build up our capital fund (cite the example in the previous Activity);
 this is one way of instilling discipline in the group, so that members will think seriously before they borrow, since through the interest, they pay a price for using the group savings;
 when members pay interest they will have a tendency to repay as soon as possible so that they do not have to pay more than what they borrowed and other members can take their turn in borrowing sooner.
4. Why Charge Penalty
The penalty of 10% per month of default is also another tool for discipline.
Activity 3: Determining our savings capacity
Time
1.5 hours
Methodology
Discussion/Lecture
Agreement Needed On Outputs
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 2 - 4; Visual Aid M 2 - 5; Visual Aid M 2 -6; Visual Aid M 2 -7.
Materials
marker pens, newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Introduce this Activity to the group as follows:
We will now try to apply what we have learned in the previous Activity. This time we will apply the principle of the "new concept of savings" in our own situation today. This is the start of our process of organizing ourselves into a group. We will therefore have to make decisions in this Activity which we will honor as members of this new group we are about to form. Our first decision and commitment is how much we want to save monthly for 6 months. Once we decide the amount as a group, each one will now be committed to this decision, as a member of the group.
2. Let us examine what it means to have saved certain amounts as a group. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 2 - 4.
Supposing 5 members of the group want to borrow this savings fund so that they can start their own small business. Each member can now borrow RMB 300. Note that each one of these 5 persons would have deposited only RMB 60 after three months and yet each one can now have an opportunity to start her own small business. By herself she would have needed to save RMB 20 for I 5 months (RMB 20 x I 5 months = RMB 300) before she can accumulate RMB 300.
The condition of the loan is that these 4 persons would need to repay after 3 months with an interest of I % per month or RMB 3 per month x 3 months = RMB 9. Since there are 4 who borrowed therefore interest earnings after 3 months is RMB 9 x 4 equals RMB 36.
3. Facilitator continues with part 2 of the example, moving the example from the fourth month to the sixth month. She draws the process of computation and analysis from the group as she did in part 1. Use Visual Aid M 2 - 5.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
4. We shall now apply the principle we have learned in our actual situation. We will now determine what level of savings we individually can make for a period of 6 months. We will discuss this in small groups and arrive at a group decision. This would be our first step and commitment in building our group.
Task Instructions: Determining Individual Savings for Group Members
1. Facilitator distributes Forms as in Visual Aid M 2 - 6.
2. Facilitator explains the form, emphasizing the following:
Each one is to determine the amount she can consistently save monthly for a period of 6 months, starting this month;
Analyze the source from which among the women's weakly expenditures, savings can be made. For example, if a woman goes to the market 2 times a month and brings RMB 30 with her, can she put aside RMB 10 each time so that at the end of the month, she would have RMB 20 for her monthly deposit;
Consider the expenditures of the farming cycle. For example, the month when women have real difficulty, because they need their cash to buy inputs for the farm. What will they do to anticipate this problem, so that they can maintain the regular monthly savings deposit?
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
5. The output of this exercise should be consolidated using Visual Aid M 2 -7. This should show the results of individual decisions as consolidated for the group. Facilitator takes the average of the figures presented, and presents this to the group as the first decision as the group savings level.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
6. Once the results are posted on the wall, Facilitator asks members to go and look at the results. She gives them 5 - 10 minutes to study this result. Facilitator then asks the participants to form themselves into small groups of 5 - 7 members in each group. She asks them to discuss and arrive at a decision.
7. Facilitator, may need to encourage the group to raise the level of savings. The women are generally timid at this stage and would tend to indicate a very low savings level. On the other hand. Facilitator should caution the group, if their level set is too high, which they cannot fulfill.
Guide Questions
(On newsprint)
1. Do we agree and accept the group savings level?
2. Do we agree and accept the commitment to do so for 6 months, making regular monthly deposits?
8. Facilitator should end this session differently from previous Activities, since this is the first major decision which the women may have taken in building their organization. For example, the staff could prepare flowers and with a little bit of ceremony, offer this to the group as their recognition and congratulations for a major decision which the group has taken.
Visual Aid M 2 - 4 (Part 1)
Illustration: Group Saving Mobilization - First Three Months
Assumption:
There are 25 members in a group. They decide to save Y20 a month for the first 6 months.
The result will be:
Month 1
25 persons x RMB 20 = RMB 500
Month 2
25 persons x 20 = 500
Month 3
25 persons x 20 = 500
Sub-total
Visual Aid M 2 - 5 (Part 2)
Illustration: Group Savings Mobilization for Succeeding Three Months
Month 4
25 persons x RMB 20 = RMB 500
Month 5
25 persons x 20 = 500
Month 6
25 persons x 20 = 500
Sub-total
Plus amount returned by 4 persons
Plus interest paid by 4 persons
Size of Savings Fund after 6 months
Visual Aid M 2 -6
My Savings Level and Source
Month
Amount
Source
(RMB)
TOTAL:
Visual Aid M 2 - 7
Consolidated: Group Savings/Source
Month
Amount
Source
(RMB)
TOTAL:
Activity 4: Group policies and procedures
Time
1 hour
Methodology
Discussion/Lecture
Agreement Needed On Outputs
Group Policies and Procedures
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 2 - 8
Materials
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. The Facilitator tells the group that because the savings belong to all members, all members should decide together on the rules on how to lend and manage the savings fund.
2. Facilitator explains a sample of a lending procedure, using Visual Aid M 2 - 8.
3.. Facilitator cautions the group that the above is only an example of what could be developed as their own procedure. Facilitator further explains, that the group at any time can adjust their policies if this is considered necessary.
Task Instructions
4. Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 women in each sub- group and asks them to discuss the above sample for 20 minutes.
5. Their task is to review and discuss the sample Policies presented and make suggestions as to changes which they would like to make.
6. Sub-groups report to the larger group what changes they would want. Facilitator notes changes suggested and asks for a group consensus or agreement on the changes.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
7. Facilitator ends the session by confirming with the group their commitment to the above as revised by them. She tells them that this now becomes the basis of their group operation.
8. Facilitator further tells the group that once their group is operational that the WPD Field Workers will help them establish the record systems for their Group Savings and Loan Operation. This system as part of the management of the group is important since the individuals in the group are the owners of the funds. Each one therefore should have a clear idea as to her obligations her privileges and the general accounting of the funds at all times.
Visual Aid M 2 - 8
Sample Group lending procedure
(1). 70% of the savings will be used for production purposes, 20% for emergencies, child education, etc. and 10% as savings base;
(2) The group savings are to be lent to members for income generation or production purposes, as soon as an amount of 200 yuan RMB. has been reached;
(3) The borrower has to submit an application. The Loans Committee will review the feasibility of the proposal and make its advise known to the group;
(4) The group discusses the loan amount and repayment period. Usually a maximum loan amount of 100-200 yuan with a repayment period of with-in 3 months for starting groups has been the experience in other groups. But this also depends on the production cycle of the activity.
(5) Interest (e.g. 1% per month) will be charged.
(6) Non-payment of loan will be subject to a penalty (e.g. 10% per month).
(7) Non-payment will mean dismissal from the group.
Activity 5: Group capital fund and the project revolving fund
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Discussion/lecture with illustrations
Agreement Needed
Conditions of the Project Revolving Fund
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid: Visual Aid M 2 - 9; Visual Aid M 2 - 10; Visual Aid M 2 - 11
Materials
marker pens; newsprint.
Note: There are two parts in this Activity. Facilitator has option to break this into two Activities. The First part: Terms and Conditions of the Project Revolving Fund. Second Part: Relationship between Group Savings and Project Loan.
Part 1: Terms and Conditions of the Project Revolving Fund
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Introduce this Activity:
1.1. First step is to help ourselves Build Up Our own Capital Fund
You have thought through, discussed and decided to help yourselves through the savings and loan operation which we have just decided on. This is significant step on your part. This means that you are serious about helping your own self and the others in the group which you have now become a member of.
1.2. Project Loan assistance as additional Source of Capital
The Project revolving fund is another source to increase the level of the group capital fund. Unlike the group savings fund, this project revolving fund belongs to all the women who want to use it.
It is a loan which has conditions. Because it belongs to the women who want to use this by taking turns, we call it a "revolving fund". Anyone who uses this fund has an obligation to repay according to conditions which she has agreed to ahead of time. She has a responsibility to the other women who are waiting to take their turn in using these funds.
1.3. Project revolving fund is a loan and not a grant
Project assistance comes in the form of a loan in the belief that this is the best way to achieve self-reliance. When a person gets a loan, the provider of the loan believes in the capabilities of the person receiving the loan. Project management therefore believes in the capabilities of the women. Project management believes that women can be accountable for their commitments. Another reason for operating the project fund as a loan is that the assistance can be used by more women, since in this case once the loans are paid these can be used for other groups. The women in this workshop class therefore if they wish to use this project assistance has a responsibility first and foremost to the other women who are waiting to be able to use these funds as well. Project management are "trustees" of these funds, meaning that they are responsible to the real owners of the fund, namely all the women who want to use these funds.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
2. Facilitator reviews the " Reasons, Indications and Consequences" of women's low status. form Module 1. Visual Aid M 1-1.
3. The Facilitator explains the Terms and Conditions of the project revolving fund. These terms and conditions are for (a) the group and (b) for individual members. Use Visual Aid M 2 9 for Terms and Conditions of Group Loan and Visual Aid M 2 - 10 for Terms and Conditions of Individual Loans.
4. After explanation of the above Terms and Conditions, Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5- 7 women in each group for discussion. They discuss the above for 15-20 minutes.
Task Instructions: Terms and Conditions of the Project Revolving Fund
You have 20 minutes for group discussion. Kindly review Visual Aids 8 and 9. Note down things which are not clear to you and at the end of 20 minutes, raise these questions to the larger group for clarification.
Note to Facilitator: Make sure that there is no misunderstanding about group loan and individual loans. Group loan is for 3 years; individual loans are for not more than one year.
Part 2: Relationship between Savings Fund and the Project Revolving Fund
5 Facilitator illustrates the relationship between the group savings fund and the project revolving fund using Visual Aid M 2 - 11.
6 Facilitator summarizes her presentation by using Visual Aid M 2 - 12. Visual Aid M 2 12 A is used as a "marker" or a tool to remember content of the Activity. Facilitator uses the latter at the very end of her presentation. Show the cycle:
savings process: participant accumulate individual resources into a pool of funds;
utilization or where the group establish policies to loan out the pool of funds or capital fund;
borrowers repay with interest and increase the group fund;
group members continue to deposit monthly savings into the fund the cycle continues.... gradually benefiting more and more members and the fund growing gradually....
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
7. After explaining this illustration, facilitator then forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 women in each subgroup for discussion. This is to allow for time and group study of the Terms and Conditions of the Project Loan and the Illustration.
Guide Instructions
Sub-groups have 20 minutes to discuss the Terms and Conditions and the Illustration. We want you to discuss this and report what is not clear to you.
Instructions for Facilitator (4)
8. Facilitator allows for groups to ask questions on the above. Facilitator clarifies and responds to questions.
9. Facilitator ends by once again emphasizing the importance of savings mobilization and utilization, by repeating important points in Activity 3.
Visual Aid M 2 - 9
Terms and Conditions of the Group Project Loan
Each member of the group is individually and jointly accountable for the group loan from the project revolving fund This means that is one member fails to repay, this affects everyone, because the group liability for repayment will be affected accordingly.
Amount: maximum of 8 times the group savings;
When: all the group members have undergone the CO workshop; 6 months after CO workshop, members would have had monthly savings according to an amount they themselves decide; members have feasible proposals; they have clear statements of (a) goals and objectives (b) clear policies and procedures (c) financial record system (d) Action Plan (e) regular monthly meetings
How: President of the WG with assistance from the WG Loans Committee, submit members' application to the County Governing Body;
Repayment: group pays 30% after first year, 30% after the 2 nd year and 40% after the 3 rd year;
Duration: Group loan is for 3 years (individual loans within the group is for not more than 1 year);
Penalty: penalties in case of delay is 10% for every month of delay;
Social Development Fee: A 4% social development fee is paid on the first month of every year for 3 years on the original amount of the loan to the county government;
Technical Assistance: the project staff will assist the group in the identification of suitable micro-enterprise and with the application.
Note: Women's group savings fund is only a condition as well as the basis for computing what will be made available to the group.
The group savings fund will always remain the property of the women's group.
Visual Aid M 2 - 10
(2) Terms and Conditions of the Individual Project Loan
1. Must have undergone the workshop in CO;
2. Accepts the Goals, spirit and principles of the WG;
3. Accepts the Objectives of the WG;
4. Accepts the Policies and Procedures of the WG, with regard to savings mobilization and utilization;
5. Agrees to abide by WG decisions;
6. Agrees to participate actively in all WG monthly meetings and special meetings;
7. Accepts her individual responsibility in the group liability for the repayment of the group project revolving fund: (a) loan payments: 30% after I year: 30% after 2 years; 30% after 3 years; (b) payment of the social development fee - 4% of the original group loan to be submitted to the county per year; (c) 1% payment for the WG fund on social development per year;
8. Accepts the condition for the individual use of the project revolving fund as follows:
(a) Loan Duration: not more than 1 year
(b) Repayment Schedule: As determined by the Loans Committee based on the nature of the micro-enterprise proposal;
(c) Payment of 1% WG Social Development Fee;
(d) Payment of 4% County Social Development Fee;
(e) Penalty payment of 10% of the loan for every month of delay in repayment,
(f) Able to re-loan after full payment, depending on availability of funds.
9. Submit their Loan Application of proposal to the Loans Committee.
Visual Aid M 2 - 11 on newsprint
Illustration: Group Savings and Project Loan Relationship
mo./yr
savings
proj. loan
Total capital
6mo
20 wom.x 6mos. x Y10 =
ly
20 wom.x 6 most x Y1 5 =
Plus previous 6 mos
1.5y
20 wom.x 6 most x Y20 =
Plus previous
Minus 30% loan payment
Project loan available
2.5y
20 wom.x 12 most xY25 =
Plus previous
Minus 30% loan payment
Project Loan available
Note that savings is already more than project loan.
3.5y
20 wom.x 12 most x Y30 =
Plus previous
Final Payment of loan
Note:
(1) that interest payments have not been included in this illustration, for simplification purposes. The capital fund therefore is bigger than what is here, through interest earnings.
(2) Monthly savings increased each year, as the women improve their income. This is an indicator of women's sense of self-reliance that their savings are gradually increasing and their dependence on the revolving fund decreasing
Visual Aid M 2 - 12: Illustration of Savings Mobilization and Utilization
Visual Aid M 2 - 12 A: Marker: Saving' and Loan Operation
Topic 2: Basic elements of a functioning organization
Background/rationale
At this stage of the workshop programme participants would already have a clearer idea of what they would want their organization to be. It is therefore important to guide the members in establishing clear goals and objectives for themselves. After this stage Facilitator guides them to establish the structure of their organization based on these goals and objectives. Roles and functions of officers of the organization are determined and approved by the group. l his whole process should end with the election of officers.
In order for members of the WG to achieve their goals and objectives they need to have to adopt an organizational model that fits the culture of the group and for members and officers to be clear about/agree on their duties and responsibilities.
Output Objectives
By the end of 14 - 15 hours participants will have:
1. Adopted commonly agreed to organizational goals, principle and spirit;
2. Adopted commonly agreed to objectives for their organization;
3. Defined an organizational model suited to their needs; defined the roles and functions of the WG officers; and elected their officers.
4. Developed and adopted organizational Policies and Procedures;
5. Analyzed and internalized three modes of leadership and chosen that which suits their needs as an organization;
6. Analyzed the processes in group decision-making and internalized the characteristics of good group decisions;
7. Analyzed and internalized the important considerations in making their group life grow;
8. Analyzed the processes of group meetings; adopted a format for their monthly meetings.
Activity 1: Goal setting
Time
1 hour
Methodology
Discussion/revision of drafts/lecture
Agreement
Needed Group Goals, Principle and Spirit and Motto
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M2-14; M2-15; M1-9; M1-10.
Note: Facilitator should review Synthesis of Module 1 to link with this Activity.
Material:
maker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Introduce this Activity by saying that at this stage of workshop, our discussions should result in important decisions with regard to essential elements in establishing our women's group. We will review what we have learned from Module 1 and this review should result in a consensus as to the goals and objectives of your organization.
2. Facilitator then tells the group that in this Activity we will be determining our goals, principle and spirit, as a group. She gives an introduction or description of these:
Goals are life aspirations
Example: To achieve our full potentials.
Once we articulate this, we now have passed from just merely existing with meeting our material needs, but we now are looking to the future. We now have ROPE. Hope drives us to achieve our aspirations in life. Without hope, we will be simply be satisfied with meeting OUT material needs. Establishing our goals therefore is to commit ourselves to something spiritual which could drive us to achieve our life aspirations both in the material and spiritual spheres.
Principle are important spiritual elements:
Example: equality and democracy.
Establishing our group principle means that we choose certain important spiritual elements which govern our actions and dealings with one another in order to achieve our goal. It is that which guides the conduct of individuals in the group.
Group Spirit
Example: Cooperation, trust, accountability.
Determining the spirit of the group means that we choose the important elements which should animate or give life to the functioning of our group. It is the bonding substance which results in a lively atmosphere in the group.
Our Motto is a short phrase
Example: A whole jar as symbol with the words " Never be broken Again"
A motto is a short phrase which captures the goal, principle and spirit of the group. Sometimes some groups even adopt a symbol and together with the phrase or sentence are used by a group to distinguish themselves. It is also used as a "battle cry" by some groups to encourage themselves or to let others know what they stand for.
Task Instructions
2. Facilitator, together with participants write down on newsprint lessons learned from the various activities of Module 1. Facilitator needs to draw out insights from participants, rather than she herself writing down answers. Write their answers under headings as in Visual Aid M 2 -14.
Task Instructions
3. Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 members in groups. Participants discuss and determine (a) goal (b) principle (c) spirit (d) motto of their organization, based on the review of Lessons learned from Module 1. Sub-groups are given 15 minutes, after which they make their presentation. Sub-groups after presentation should reach a consensus for one group statement of GOAL, PRINCIPLE, SPIRIT, MOTTO.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
Synthesis: Important Points
Goal Setting
4. Facilitator draws from what the participants have summarized above and synthesizes WG goals along lines as in Visual Aid M 2 -15.
5. Facilitator encourages changes by referring them to the " Roots, Indications and Consequences of Women's Low Status" and " Approaches to Change our Situation" :in Module 1 Visual Aid M 1- 9 and M 1-10.
6. Facilitator asks a few questions like; (a) what did you specifically want to change? (b) how do you went to change these specific situations? (remember Situation analysis in Module 1).
7. After this synthesis, facilitator asks group for consensus or agreement. This is to validate the above. if this truly reflects what their aspirations are. Note that facilitator should encourage the group to make their own modifications and additions. This should however be not to wordy or long.
Visual Aid M 2 - 14
Headings for Lessons Learned from Module I
1. Self-Introduction of participants
2. Expectation Setting
3. Situation Analysis
4. The Need to Organize Ourselves
5. Knowing Self and Others
6. Communication
7. Cooperation
8. Trust
Note: Facilitator should have studied the synthesis of Module I at this stage and should have noses to link outputs in Module If or the group development of their Goals, principles and spirit
Visual Aid M 2 - 15 - A SAMPLE
Our Group Goal, Principle, Spirit And Motto
Our Goal
Self-reliance
Self development
Caring for self
Prosperity through self
Our Group Principle
Voluntary
Equality
Democratic
Self-rule
Our Group Spirit
Unity
Mutual Help
Cooperation and Trust
Dedication and Sacrifice
Our Motto:
(Let the group develop their own. In one place for example they used this motto: "Yes we Can ".)
Activity 2: Objectives setting
Time
2 hour
Methodology
Discussion/draft revisions/lecture
Agreement Needed on Output Group Objectives
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 2 - 16; M 2 - 17.
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this activity:
By linking this with the previous Activity. Goals are expressions of our aspirations. These are what we hope to achieve. Objectives are concrete steps we take to achieve our goals or our aspirations. We therefore need to serious think about these important steps. We need to agree as a group on these concrete steps. The staff has prepared a draft based on what you have decided as to the "Goal, Principle, Spirit and Motto" of your organization.
2. Facilitator presents a draft objectives for women's groups as in Visual Aid M 2 - 16. Facilitator goes over the material line by line and in dialogue with the participants, gives or draws examples from the group. She asks questions from time to time whether they have understood the points clearly.
3. Facilitator must remember that the women need to have a very clear understanding of everything in this material, since they will have to make these as their bases of their Action Plan which will be developed later. This is therefore part of their commitment as partners in the project implementation.
Task Instructions
4. Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 women in a sub-group. They are told that they have 30 minutes to discuss this draft. They are to arrive at a consensus on these Objectives, with modifications as they see fit.
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
(a) Identify areas which are not clear and ask for clarification from Facilitator and Monitors, who will be going around during the discussion period;
(b) Analyze, modify the objectives and add as required;
(c) Fill in the blanks in the draft.
(d) Arrive at an agreement;
(e) Submit the results of sub-group work to the Facilitator.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
5. Facilitator gives the group a break. The workshop staff study the sub-groups results and then present a consolidated report to the larger group.
6. Facilitator posts the result in newsprint and reviews line by line, seeking agreement or consensus from the group. Where there is divergent opinions, Facilitator asks for concurrence. If there are strong positions on certain issues, Facilitator asks sub-groups with divergent positions to discuss among themselves and seek consensus.
FACILITATOR SHOULD NEVER DICTATE HER OWN POSITION. REMEMBER THIS IS A DECISION ON THEIR OWN RESOURCES AND THEIR OWN TIME AND EFFORT.
7. After posting the consolidated report, facilitator asks the group to come and view the results on the wall. Give them 10-15 minutes. REVALIDATE THEIR DECISION BY ASKING THEM AS A GROUP, IF THEY AGREE WITH THIS CONSOLIDATE VERSION.
Visual aid M 2 - 16
Draft Group Objectives
Part 1 - Three-month Period
(1) By the end of 3 months our women's group (WG) would have:
(a) RMB__ amount of savings would have been mobilized, of which___ would have been loaned to___ members;
(b) organized literacy classes for___ women and held regular classes for them (at least___ times);
(c) organized technological skills workshop in___ ,___ ,___ (state the area for workshop);
(d) organized medical check for women and children in the village; agreed with the village doctor as to how to coordinate work and needed assistance (help through social development fund (SDF);
(c)organized and scheduled regular educational sessions on maternal and child health and family planning, with the assistance from MCH and FP personnel;
Go made folk media presentations for the whole village, prepared by members of the WG, using messages on raising women's status;
(g) an activity room where the WG could meet regularly.
Part 2: Six-month Period
(2) By the end of 6 months our women's group (WG):
(a) RMB___ mobilized of which___ would have been loaned to___ members;
(b) Our WG would have___ micro-enterprise proposals for funding from the Project Revolving Fund for a total amount of RMB___ (8 times the group savings after 6 months),
(c) organized literacy classes for___ women and held regular classes for them (a) least___ times);
(d) organized technological skills workshop in___ ,___ ,___ (state the area for workshop);
(e) organized medical check for women and children in the village; agreed with the village doctor as to how to coordinate work and needed assistance (help through social development fund (SDF),
(f) organized and scheduled regular educational sessions on maternal and child health and family planning, with the assistance from MCH and FP personnel;
(g) made folk media presentations for the whole village, prepared by members of the WG, using messages on self-reliance and raising women's status.
(Note: Project staff will assist group after 6 months to develop Specific Objectives and Action Plan for another 6 months. This becomes an on-going process every six months for the group for at least 3 years.)
Part 3: Three and a hay- year Period
(3) By the end of 3.5 years (after group would have paid back all their loans from the project revolving fund):
(a) Each member of the group would have operated her own micro-enterprise and would increased her income by at least 80%;
(b) Group members would have at least fifteen times that of their savings fund after 6 months (after six months___ ; after three and a half years___)
(c) Each member in the group who wish to borrow from the savings fund and the revolving fund would have been able to have borrowed at least 2-3 times;
(d) The WG would have contributed significantly to the regularization and upgrading of the quality of service for MCH/FP in the village;
(e) Literacy and numeracy levels would have improved; illiterates in the group would have passed at least the first level of qualification for literacy;
(f) Each member would have at least 2-3 other technological skills acquired;
(g) The WG would have undertaken at least one social development project for the village each year,
(h) The WG would have made at least 2 folk media presentations each year, prepared by themselves and using messages on self-reliance and raising women's status.
Visual aid M - 2 -17
Consolidated report of sub-group outputs on Objectives
Note: This should have the same format as the draft, only that it would contain adjustments that the participants would have made.
Activity 3: Leadership styles
Time
2 hours
Methodology:
Role Playing/discussion/lecture
Agreement Needed On Output: Leadership style chosen
Steps
Preparations:
Cases 2,3, 4.
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint.
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by putting this activity in context. In the last two activities we have arrived at agreements as to goals and specific objectives of our women's group. I want to emphasize that these were not just activities to learn how to determine our goals and objectives, but that we have actually committed ourselves to these goals and objectives for our organization. In this Activity we will examine the leadership style most suited to our organization against these goals and objectives.
Task Instructions
2. Divide participants into 3 groups.
3. Facilitator asks each group to prepare to role play three Cases as in Cases 2, 3, 4. Ask the role-players to enhance this and put some drama into it. Use their imagination.
Task Instructions
4. After the role playing presentations of these three groups the Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 women for discussion.
Guide Questions
(On newsprint)
(a) Which one is:
Autocratic leader: The one who did not give the members a chance to express their own ideas. Dictated instructions for others to follow. Members were bored.
Democratic leader: the one who prepared an agenda by asking for suggestions about what to discuss in the meeting; who allowed the members to express their own ideas; who had some system in the way the meeting was conducted; had clear statement of the decision of the group. Members feel satisfied because they participated in the decision-making.
Laissez-faire leader: the one who, although very talkative and easy going, had no system in the way she conducted the meeting or was disorderly; allowed anyone to do whatever they wanted; no clear decision in the group. Members enjoyed themselves but were not really satisfied because they did not accomplish anything.
(b) Which leadership style is best suited to our women's group and why? Be reminded of our group goals and objectives in making this choice.
(c) What are the characteristics of a good leader?
(d) What are the functions of a leader?
4. Sub-groups report.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
5. Facilitator summarizes the results on newsprint using the questions above as headings.
Important Pointers
Answers:
(a) Type of Leaders:
Madame A - Autocratic leader
Madame B - democratic leader
Madame C - Laissez-faire leader
(b) Best Suited to their Situation and their Goals
Democratic leader
(c) Characteristics of a Good leader
She always has the group goal, principle and spirit in thoughts and behavior she is humble, wise, resourceful, honest, open-minded, enterprising, efficient and effective.
(d) Functions of a leader:
Initiator - she initiates or starts to mobilize the group, mindful of the various talents and capabilities of members;
Information source - she generally seeks or gathers essential information which are needed for group decision-making;
Evaluator - As discussion is going on she generally observes what is going on and introduces elements which may not be considered by the group;
Supporter - She provides moral support especially for the weak ones, in terms of encouragement; dedication of her time, skill and resources.
6. Facilitator ends this session as she asks the group, which style of leadership suits their organization best, according to what they have adopted as their Goal, principle and spirit and their organizational objectives. She seeks agreement and adoption from the group.
Case 2: Role Playing - Madame A
The scene: Meeting to Plan for a Dance in the Village.
The leader: Lists down instructions for at least 5 members for tasks she wants done.
The leader: Gives instructions in a bossy way, calling on each of the 5 and verbalizes her instructions.. her voice is loud and holds herself proudly.
The members: Just sit there without asking questions and perhaps some are talking to each other, while the leader is talking. They look bored and sleepy. Someone asks a question and the leader barks at her and tells her to keep quite. At the end everybody says "yes".
Case 3: Role Playing Madame B
The Scene: Meeting to Plan for a Dance in the Village
The leader: Starts the meeting by greeting the group and thanking them for coming to the meeting. She sets a tone of being open and courteous and business-like. She tells them the purpose of the meeting and tells them that this meeting will last for one hour.
The leader: After explaining the purpose of the meeting, she asks the group if there is anyone who has any suggestions along the following lines:
(a) The time of the dance (from what time to what time)
(b) That funds are available (Y _), but she thinks this may not be enough and therefore she is asking for ideas on how to raise funds;
(c) What presentations there should be and who should be in charge of these;
(d) Whether they should invite their friends from the other village.
Discussion: During the discussion, members participate and give their ideas under each heading. The leader writes down their suggestion on the blackboard. The leader encourages the shy ones to give their ideas. During the discussion, from time to time, the leader asks the group if what is being discussed is clear.
If there are disagreements, the leader asks the group on how to resolve the disagreement. She tries to clarify misunderstanding.
At the end: Leader asks someone to summarize what was agreed on. She marks these points among what she has written on the blackboard. She asks once more whether the group agrees to what they have decided. If there is still a need to clarify, she allows for time to do so. At the end she thanks everybody and tells the group that she is very glad that this plan has been arrived at as group endeavor.
Case 4: Role Playing Madame C
The Scene: Meeting to Plan for a Dance in the village
The Leader: Comes in to the meeting hall late when everybody has already arrived. She tells them that she is very busy and tells a story about something unrelated to the purpose of the meeting. Then absent-mindedly, she realizes that she needs to at lest tell them the purpose of the meeting. She then asks the group to give their ideas on what they want to do for the dance. She has no agenda.
The members: When the leader started with her unrelated story, one member joins her and tells a similar story, which has nothing to do with this meeting. Another member asks why are we meeting? The leader then is reminded to state the purpose of the meeting. They talk about many unrelated things in the meeting and from time to time go back to the purpose of the meeting. Some members leave the meeting half way through without excusing themselves.
After 15 minutes, the leader says " let us see who wants to do something for this dance". One member raises her hand and says she would like to prepare a play by children and present this at the dance. The leader agrees and says: "that's OK as long as you take care of everything." Another one has another idea and is met with the same remark.
At the end the leader says thank you and says "we will see you all at the dance".
Activity 4: Group organizational structure
Time
1 hour
Methodology
Discussion/lecture
Agreement Needed
Organizational Model chosen by the group
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 2 - 18; Visual Aid M 2 - 19
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (I)
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by saying that now we have determined our goals and objectives and have decided on the leadership style we want. It is now time to determine the organizational structure best suited for our needs based on what we have so far decided.
2 . Show the 2 organizational models to the participants as in Visual Aid .
Visual aid M 2-18 on newsprint - Organizational Structure Model 1
Visual aid M 2-19 on newsprint - Organizational Structure Model 2
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
Important Points
3. Facilitator discusses the advantages and disadvantages of the 2 models.
Considerations of geography, group interest, type of production etc. should enter into the consideration in the choice of an organizational model. For example if members are geographically dispersed perhaps Model 2 is better. If members, are situated in a compact area, then Model 1 is better. When group enlarges membership Model 2 will be more suitable.
4. Let the participants decide which model they want.
Organizational Model 1
Organizational Model 2
Activity 5: Dudes and responsibilities of officers
Time
1 hour
Methodology
Discussion/ draft revisions/lecture
Agreement Needed
Dudes and Responsibilities of Officers
Election
Election of Officers
Steps
Preparations:
Facilitator writes Duties of Officers on newsprint ahead of time.
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Introduce this Activity by saying that we have just decided on the organizational structure which is best suited for our situation. In this activity we will be doing two important tasks namely (a) define the duties and responsibilities of our officers in the organizational structure and (b) we will be electing our officers for our WG. It is therefore very important that each member participate in the discussions and decisions we arrive at.
Task Instructions
2. Divide the participants in sub-groups of 5 - 7 members
Task Guide
Give one group the task of defining the duties and responsibilities of one or two officers in the organizational structure.
Give 15 - 20 minutes for this task.
3. Ask the group to report on newsprint. While one group is presenting ask the other groups to make comments or add to the list. Facilitator makes these changes on the newsprint.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
5. Link results of group discussion to Important points as in Visual Aid M 2 - 20.
4. Facilitator revalidates the agreed duties and responsibilities of officers.. She makes sure that the group agrees to points which she herself would have recommended, if the group missed said points. Facilitator must make sure that the group looks at her inputs as suggestions, and therefore the group must agree, if they think that this is a good idea. Facilitator must not impose.
Task Instructions
6 Facilitator then asks the group to elect their officers among themselves. Facilitator asks for volunteers to write on the blackboard of those nominated and to tabulate results. Voting should be in groups. Literates write their candidates on a piece of paper. Literates invite illiterates to say who her choices are and the literate writes in a piece of paper accordingly. Elections should be done with secret ballots .
Visual Aid M 2 - 20
Duties and Responsibilities of WG Officers
President
 Presides in meetings/group activities;
 Executes decision's of the group;
 Represents the WG in official function;
 Liaise with different related institutions.
Vice President
 Presides in meetings/group activities;
 Assist the president in all undertakings;
 Takes over the function of the president in her absence.
Secretary
 Prepares minutes of the meeting;
 Maintains records/files of WG;
 Informs members on the meetings/schedule and place of meeting.
Treasurer
 Collects savings and membership dues from members;
 Collect loans of members;
 Records all financial transactions and maintain books of account; Prepare financial reports.
Auditor
 Audits financial records of WG;
 Audits the assets including equipment and properties of the WG.
Loans Committee
 Composed of a chairman and two to four members;
 Reviews, evaluates and assesses loan application of members;
 Recommends approval of loans for funding.
Members
 Actively participate in all group activities, meetings, workshops etc.;
 Come up with proposal for group activities, problem solving;
 Make democratic decisions after discussion;
 Contribute savings;
 Decide on groups policies and procedures;
 Make Action Plan;
 Share their experiences and knowledge with other group members;
 Elect their officers democratically for a period of 2 years.
Activity 6: Group decision-making
Time
3 hours
Methodology
Case Study/Discussion/lecture
Note for Facilitator
There are three parts in this Activity:
Part 1: Analysis of the Case
Part 2: Considerations: Good Group Decision (short lecture)
Part 3: Kinds of Decisions (short lecture)
Part 4: Considerations: How to Make Our Group Life
Grow
(short lecture)
Option Facilitator has option to have another Activity for Part 4.
Steps
Preparations:
Case 5: Wang Lan's Problem; Visual Aid M 2 - 19; Visual Aid 2 - 20; Visual Aid M 2 21.
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
Part 1: Case Analysis
1. Introduce this Activity by saying that once we organize ourselves into a group we have to decide as a group, since we have opted for a democratic model of organization. Arriving at good decisions as a group is not easy sometimes. We need to understand what factors influence decision-making, if we want to operate our organization according to the goals we have established of equality, unity and in a democratic manner.
2. Divide participants into sub-groups of 5 - 7 women.
3. Give one copy of Case 5 to each group. Ask one of them to read it to the rest in the subgroup. They can even dramatize this, to make it lively. Sub-group discussion should result in a group decision along the lines as presented in the Guide Questions.
Guide Questions
(a) Who is the most despicable or most sinful ? Why?
(b) List down the different characteristics of the different characters.
(c) How did you arrive at your decision?
4. Sub-group reports to large group.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
5. During the report period, facilitator asks questions on HOW they arrived at their decision. Who among them had difficulty in agreeing with the rest? How did the group manage this? What have we learned from this? Ask someone among the group who had a different decision in the group in the beginning and ask her what made her agree? And whether she is comfortable with the group decision.
6. During this period, facilitator draws attention to the need to recognize each other's differences in values and how we need to respect each other. On how one sometimes need to compromise, as long as this is not on fundamental values. That we are willing to compromise or sacrifice our views for the good of the group.
7. If the group took a short time to come to an agreement, facilitator should ask why. Could it be that they were not interested? What does this mean in terms of group effectiveness? Is it because they were afraid to disagree with each other? What does this mean to group effectiveness?
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
8. Facilitator synthesizes by reviewing the characteristics of each character in the story. She makes sure that that she does not present her own opinion. She emphasizes the following important points:
Important Points
1. There is no correct answer in this story. This is a situation where our personal values color our view of the situation. If we truly respect one another, we therefore will respect one another's view and judgment on situations.
2. In a group situation, we would sometime need to compromise in order for us, as a group to arrive at a decision, provided that this compromise does not go against very deep values which we hold. In this group discussion, what is important is (a) to recognize each other's differences and (b) that even with these differences, we arrive at a group decision.
3. Our group will be effective if we allow for each one's ideas. We should not be afraid of disagreements, because usually if disagreements are resolved well, this deepens the ties of the group. But we must take time and loving consideration of one another, in order for us to resolve our differences.
4. If our group has members who only say "Yes" all the time without thinking, our group will deteriorate, because we will only be depending on the ideas of a few or the leader to think for us. This is not according to what we want to achieve - to eliminate the culture of dependence and to cultivate self-reliance.
Part 2: Considerations: Good Group Decision
5. Facilitator presents some considerations in arriving at a good group decision. Use Visual Aid M2-20.
Part 3: Kinds of Group Decisions
Instructions for Facilitator (4)
6. Facilitator lectures/dialogue with the large group on "kinds of group decisions". The group should feel good when it makes decisions . But sometimes we do not feel good even after a group decision has been reached. Let us examine the kinds of group decisions. We can even give a "name" to the different kinds of decisions, so that we can remember them better.
6.1. "Madaha" Decision
This is when a group arrives at a decision very fast, without much thought and discussions because they are in a hurry to finish the task. No creative thought. The problem addressed remains unresolved. No one follows what was agreed on.
6.2. "Pick-pocket" Decision
This decision is a stolen decision. The robbery can happen in two ways. Either the group steals the ideas from others and simply copy the ideas without analyzing its consequences.
Or when there is someone or a group of persons in the group who want her or their ideas adopted, but are not brave enough to openly discuss it. They resort to ways to cheating the group, by telling untruths which the group likes, so, that the group would decide in their favor.
6.3. "Puppet" Decision
This is similar to the "pick-pocket" decision in that it is a decision where the group has been used, except that in this case, the group has allowed a person to manipulate it for her own purposes. The group therefore is more accountable, since they allow this to happen to them.
6.4. "Jelly Fish" Decision
A jelly fish moves, but it moves very slowly and cannot seem to decide where it wants to go. A decision which is arrived at slowly and without much thought, because the group has no sense of direction is a "jelly fish" decision. Everybody is nice to everybody and the group is not able to address hard issues or painful issues and arrive at difficult decisions.
6.5. The "Boil" Decision
When we have a "boil" in our body, we feel uncomfortable. Until the puss is taken out our wound does not heal and we can only feel comfortable after the puss is taken out, may be by cutting a small incision where the boil is.
When a group has made a decision and after which many persons feel uncomfortable because they did not really address the painful issues in the group to resolve, this could tee called a "boil" decision. There are resentments which grows in the group like an infection. Until this "boil" is addressed or a cut is made to let the puss of resentment out, the group suffers and this could even destroy the group.
6.6. The "cart wheel" Decision
The wheel of a cart has spokes. Each spoke has a force and function to contribute to the whole wheel. Friction or tension is required to make the cart wheel move.
In a group decision-making, the group makes substantial progress if each one contributes the best she has. Through good leadership these contributions could be anaged or orchestrated as one whole force to make the group progress, like the cartwheel. A healthy level of tension is necessary to challenge one another in search of always the best ideas, like the needed tension or friction for the cart wheel to be able to move.
Part 4: Considerations : How to Make Our Group Life Grow
Instructions for Facilitator (5)
7. Considerations on how to make our group life grow
Facilitator continues and focuses on the importance of each members in contributing to the building up of the group. One venue where group life needs to be enhanced is during the group meetings, because this is where the group develop bonds with each other, besides the time when they make decisions which affect all of them.
Once we agree to form ourselves into a group, each one of us has an obligation to cultivate our group life and make it grow. Our group has a life of its own. And it will grow strong and have a long life, if we continually make efforts to make it grow. There are some considerations which can make our group grow. One set of these consideration we call the "basic life element" and the other we call "maintenance of group functions".
10. Facilitator sums up what has been covered during this Activity: ONLY HIGHLIGHTS.
(a) Important points in decision-making based on Case 5;
(b) Important points in Consideration: Good Group Decision;
(c) Kinds of Decisions
(d) Important points: Considerations in Making Group Life Grow.
Case 5: Wang Lan's Problem
This is a real story that took place in a village. A young girl named Wang Lan has a primary school degree. A young man named Zhao Yan had a middle school degree. Both of them were born and lived in the same village. They were friends since childhood. In 1976, they got married and had a happy life since then. Wang Lan thought that was not enough. She feels that her husband should have a better education. With a better education, the family could have a better future. So Wang Lan helped her husband until he can enter the university and pursue higher education. After graduation from the university. Zhao Yan became a teacher in their county town. He was very grateful for the efforts exerted by his wife to support him through his university studies. Loving his wife more deeply than ever, Zhao Yan goes home on Sundays to help his wife with household chores. This gained for them the admiration of the village townsfolk.
However, a year later, the number of times Zhao Yan went home decrease. Wang thought that her husband must be very busy and thus decided to go see him when she was free. But her husband was very cold to her. Wang Lan did not mind this thinking that Zhao Yan must be tired. On her second visit, her husband turned a deaf ear to her plea and this made Wang Lan very sad. But soon after she went to see husband again. This time, she saw Zhao Yan in bed sleeping with a beautiful young lady teacher. Having seen this she felt so heart-broken and cried out. She went home without saying anything.
After a period of time, Zhao Yan went back and raised the need for a divorce. Wang Lan would not agree because she thought that they had a pleasant past. In addition, they have two children to consider. She tried to persuade her husband not to pursue a divorce but Zhao Yan would not change his mind. He even asked his brother and sister to make it a hard time for Wang Lan.
Once, Zhao Yan's brother Zhao Zheng's ox went to Wang Lan's field and ate her crops. As soon as Wang Lan learned of what was happening, she drove the ox out of the field. When Zhao Zheng saw this, he went to Wang Lan and questioned her. Wang Lan explained the case, but Zhao Zheng would not listed. Just then Zhao Yan's sister, Zhao Xia was passing by. Having seen the incident, she went home and brought a spade. She gave it to Zhao Zheng who in turn beat Wang Lan with the spade until Wang Lan fell down. Through the doctor's examination, it was found that Wang Lan's right shoulder sustained a deep wound. Because of this she would not be able to raise her right arm anymore. She has become crippled for life.
When Wang Qiang, Lan's brother learned of what his sister has suffered, he went to the village leader Li Wingfu, asking him to deal with the case. But the village leader just said: "This is the business of your families. It should be handled among your two families."
Visual aid M 2 - 21
Considerations in arriving at a Good Group Decision
(1) There should be enough information about issue to be decided upon;
(2) Enough time to discuss the issue. The democratic leader should facilitate the discussion, making sure that the shy ones are able to participate. Those who have disagreements are able to express their opinion and reach a compromise;
(3) Various alternatives have been presented;
(4) Open communication - listening to one another;
(5) Respect one another's opinion;
(6) An atmosphere of trust and dedication for a common goal;
(7) Decision must be sensible and reasonably feasible for concrete action;
(8) Final decision clearly stated and agreement given by the group.
Visual Aid M 2 - 22
Considerations: How to Make Our Group Life Grow
There are basic elements in the functioning of a Group. We might say that the group is like a living organism which has its own life and which needs to be nurtured to maintain its health. Below are some of these major nurturing elements.
1. Basic elements
1. Initiating
Getting the group started on the task at hand. Offering new suggestions; new topics for discussion.
2. Asking for information
Asking one another for what we know about what we are discussing.
And for identifying resources outside the group for what we do not know.
3. Giving information person
If someone knows something about what we are discussing, this gives it happily.
4. Asking for Opinions
Members asks others to give their idea. Especially the shy ones.
5. Giving Opinion
The shy ones especially have an obligation to share their ideas in a group.
6. Explaining
Giving practical examples, about what is being discussed.
7. Clarifying discussed
Asking a question or repeating a point to make what is being clear.
8. Summarizing
Stating briefly, the main points discussed or decided upon.
9. Checking comfortable Decisions
Seeing if everyone, especially the silent ones agree and are with the decisions.
2. Maintenance Functions
1. Encouraging
Being friendly; responding to and building on suggestions of others; encouraging; acceptance and appreciation of others and their ideas.
2. Helping was hand
Giving a quite person a chance to join the discussion (Xiao Kang about to say something can we hear what she has to say)
3. Setting standard"
"Shall we agree that we will ask the shy ones to speak first?" Can we try to finish before 6 p.m.?"
4. Harmonizing
Helping those in conflict to understand each other's point of view.
5. Relieving have tension
" May be we are getting too discouraged. Look what we already accomplished." "Let us have a break first". Or a well times joke.
Activity 7: WG policies and procedures
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Discussion/lecture
Agreement Needed
WG Polices and Procedures
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 2 - 23; Visual Aid M 2 - 24; Visual Aid M 2 - 25.
Visual Aid M 2 - 9; Visual Aid M 2 - 10 (Only for review)
Material:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this Activity by saying that there must be rules and regulations openly discussed and agreed to by everyone, for an organization to be able to function democratically. These are called Policies and Procedures, or rules that govern the functioning of our organization.
2. These policies and procedures safeguard our equality and unity as we operate our group democratically and promote the systematic accomplishment of our objectives and ultimately our goals as a group.
3 . There are three major areas where policies and procedures need to be established namely: (a) membership (b) savings mobilization and utilization (c) project loans operation (d) social development operation.
4. Facilitator tells the group that she has prepared a draft in these three areas for them to discuss. Thoughtful and thorough discussions are required for the group to decide on these as their Policies and Procedures. These become a formal basis for your organization to operate. It is therefore very important that they thoroughly review the draft and introduce changes as required.
5. Note however that the Terms and Conditions related to the Project Revolving Fund are precisely that - terms and conditions. No changes can be made. If the group wishes to avail of these funds they must (a) clearly understand these terms and conditions and (b) accept these.
6. Note further, that most of these materials have already been discussed in previous Activities, it is only to formalize these as a part of the group organizational Policies and Procedures.
Task Instructions
7. Facilitator presents on newsprint the draft found in Visual aid M 2 - 23; Visual Aid 2 M 2 24 and Visual Aid M 2 - 25.
Task Guide
1. Devote 15 minutes to each draft in discussion and determining changes you want;
2. Since there are three drafts, you will be given 45 minutes;
3. Sub-groups report to larger group after 45 minutes.
4. Visual Aid M 2 - 9 and Visual Aid M 2 - 10 have already been discussed. At this stage, we will review these and make sure that we are clear about the Terms and Conditions of the Project Revolving Fund and that we accept these conditions.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
8. Facilitator ends this session by revalidating every point in the Visual Aids used in this Activity.
Visual aid M 2- 23
QUALIFICATION/REQUIREMENTS FOR MEMBERS
1. Must be a woman permanently residing in the hamlet;
2. Participated in the 64-hour workshop for WG;
3. Accepts the Goals and Objectives of the WG;
4. Accepts WG Policies with regard to (a) savings mobilization and utilization; (b) Terms and conditions of the project revolving fund; (c) social development activities;
5. Accepts to participate in all group activities;
6. Agreed to attend WG meetings regularly.
Visual aid M 2- 24
SAMPLE SAVINGS PROCEDURES
1. Members deposit (weekly? or monthly?) savings;
2. Members are encouraged to deposit excess income to WG;
3. Members maintain their own record; keep individual passbooks;
4. Members agree to save at least___ yuan per month
5. Members agree to loan out the savings fund to members of the WG;
6. Members agree to charge interest of___ % for the use of the savings fund;
7. Members agree follow the policies and procedures for loan utilization.
8. Treasurer keeps records of transactions.
Visual aid M 2 - 25
Social Development Commitments
Members agree to mobilize themselves to:
1. Organize classes for illiterate members and to include others in the village in these classes;
2. Encourage these illiterate members to achieve a certification of competency;
3. Have an organized effort to improve members knowledge about maternal and child health care and family planning;
4. Have an organized effort to improve the services in the village for maternal and child health care through close cooperation with the village doctor/midwife and if needed to help improve the facilities of the village health station;
5. Have an organized effort to improve basic facilities in the village, such as water supply, planting of trees, roads etc.;
6. Organize technological skills workshop in various field of interest women have identified so that group members and women in the village would have at least one other new skill which they can use for additional income;
7. Organize folk media presentations which we ourselves prepare to express the concerns and changes we experience in the area of self reliance and improvement of our status.
Note: Unlike those above the following are no longer drafts, they ore Terms and Conditions required by Project Management.
1.8. Recapitulation of the importance of savings mobilization and utilization
Activity 8: WG regular meetings
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Role Playing/discussion/lecture
Agreement Needed
WG Standard Agenda Structure
Steps
Preparations:
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. The regular monthly meetings of the WG is one important building block in deepening the life of the group. This is where group members can discuss the most important things which affect all of them. Decisions made there affect all of the members. We will therefore analyze the important characteristics of a good group meeting.
2. In order to have a good meeting there are three essential stages which must be accomplished namely: (a) preparation of an agenda; (b) open discussion and clear decisions during the meeting (c) minutes of the meeting as a record and basis for action and as reference for the next meetings.
Task Instructions
3. One day before this Activity, the Facilitator assigns one sub-group (5- 7 women) to prepare to role play a meeting, giving them the following a Task Guide as in Visual Aid M 2 - 26.
4. Facilitator assigns someone to take minutes of the meeting during the role playing. She asks this person to write the minutes on news print.
5. After the role playing facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 women and discuss their assessment of the role playing exercise.
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
(a) Was there enough information about issues to be decided upon;
(b) Was enough time given to discuss the issues, with the democratic leader facilitating the discussion, making sure that the shy ones were able to participate and those who have disagreements were able to express their opinion and reach a compromise;
(c) Various alternatives have been presented;
(d) Open communication listening to one another;
(e) Respect one another's opinion;
(f) An atmosphere of trust and dedication for a common goal;
(g) Decision must be sensible and reasonably feasible for concrete action;
(h) Final decision clearly stated and agreement given by the group?
5. Sub-groups report the results of their discussion.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
6. Facilitator summarizes results of discussions and synthesizes with the following important points:
Important points
Preparing a Meeting:
1. Who is expected to attend?
2. Who will preside over the meeting?
3. When and where is it scheduled?
3. Who will record the minutes?
4. Who will prepare the agenda, e.g. secretary or group leader?
5. What topics are left unresolved and undiscussed during the previous meeting ?
6. What important topics need to be decide by members/officers for discussion ?
7. Who should execute decisions and be responsible for activities ?
8. What new topics have been decided upon for discussion ?
The Conduct of the Meeting
Facilitator uses Guide Questions as outline for emphasizing points.
Minutes of the WG Meeting
Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 2 - 26 Part 3.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
7. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 2 - 27 and explains to the group that this format should be used by the WG in all their meetings. That this is part of the standard system of the Project.
Visual Aid M 2 - 26
Task Guide for Role Playing WG Meeting
Part 1 - Preparation and Running of the Meeting - 1 hour
The Scene
A meeting room
The Agenda
Before the meeting the leader writes down on the blackboard the agenda of the meeting, by putting down the topics for discussion under the following headings:
3.1. Literacy Activities
(put down one or two issues to be discussed)
3.2. Technical Skills Workshop
(put down issues to be discussed)
3.3. Maternal and child health and Family Planning
(put down issues to be discussed)
3.4. Folk Media Activities
(put down issues to be discussed)
3.5. Savings mobilization and utilization
(put down issues to be discussed)
3.6. project Revolving Fund
(put down issues to be discussed)
3.7 Use of the 1% Social Development Fund
(put down issues to be discussed)
3.8. Group activities for the village
(put down issues to be discussed)
Part 2: The Meeting Proper - 30 minutes
The leader Starts the meeting. Pointers for the leader:
(a) Your role is to clearly review the agenda with the group;
(b) Facilitate discussion so that there is wide participation in the discussion, especially the shy ones so that there is a wide range of experience used in decision-making;
(c) Remember the principles which were discussed in the Activity under "Decision-Making".
Part 3: Important Elements of Minutes of a Meeting
(a) General Information
- Name of the Group
- Type of Meeting (regular of special)
- Place and date it was held
(b) A cow of the Agenda with important comments from the group under each item of the
agenda
(c) A list of major decisions and persons responsible for accomplishing the decision
(d) List of members present and absent
(e) Certification - Usually done by the Group Leader
Visual Aid M 2 - 27 on newsprint
WG Standard Agenda Structure
1. Literacy Activities
2. Technological Skills Workshop
3. Maternal and Child Health and Family Planning
4. Folk Media Activities
5. Savings Mobilization and Utilization
6. Project Revolving Fund
7. Use of the 1% Social development Fund
8. Other activities for the village
Topic 3: Synthesis of module 2
Activity 1
Synthesis of Module 2
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Lecture/discussion
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aids: See list as in No.1 below. Should be posted ahead of time.
Material:
marker pens; newsprint; flowers for participants (congratulations for hard work)
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
Part 1: Establishing Background for Synthesis
1. Workshop staff clears the walls of the room, taking away all the newsprint there and posting only the Visual Aids listed below.
1.1. M 1 - 01
Roots, Indications, Consequences of Women's Low Status
1.2. M 1 - 02
Approaches In Raising Women's Status
1.3. M 2 - 15
WG Goals, Principle, Spirit and Motto
1.4. M 2 - 17
WG Objectives
1.5. M 2 - 18 or 1 9
Organizational Chart (their choice)
1.6. M 2 - 20
Duties and Responsibilities of Officers
1.7. M 2 - 9, 10, 23, 23, 25, 27
Policies and Procedures:
Lending Procedure
Qualifications/requirements for members
Savings Procedure
Social Development Commitments
Terms and Conditions of the Project Group Loan
Terms and Conditions of the Project Individual Loan
WG Standard Agenda
M 2 -4,5
Illustration of Savings Mobilization and Utilization
M 2 - 3
Mutual Assistance Through Savings and Loan
M 2 - 11
Illustration: Group Savings Mobilization and use of Group Project Loan
1 9. M 2 - 29 Marker for Synthesis
2. Facilitator asks participants to go around the room and read and reflect on the results of their work. Give them 15 - 20 minutes to do this.
Part 2: Synthesizing Elements of Organizational Mechanics
3. Facilitator points to all of the above as to what we mean by "organizational mechanics" as the title of Module 2 indicates. Compared to a machine, these are the elements which make the engine of the organization function. If one of these is not functioning properly, then the whole body of the organizational machine cannot function effectively.
Part 3: Participant Reflection
Task Instruction
4. Facilitator asks for volunteers to share how they feel about what they have accomplished so far. Facilitator should give sufficient time for this reflection phase, by encouraging as many participants to speak out as possible.
Part 4: Marker Established
5. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 2 - 28 as visual aid marker for this synthesis. She explains the relationships as follows:
The broken Jar
Our current low status
The Whole Jar
Our determination to Change our Situation
The Savings/Loan Jars
The foundation for Self-Reliance
The House and its elements
Our Group with its Mechanics of Operation
6. Facilitator then ends this session:
Confirm and praise the participants for their hard work This is now a very important and substantial output of the workshop.
Perhaps they themselves did not believe in themselves that they can achieve all this. Refer to their group goal, principle and spirit and relate this to how well they have actually manifested these at this stage.
6. A small ceremony celebrating what the group and the staff has accomplished at this stage would be suggested. For example, if this session is towards the end of the day, perhaps some candle light ceremony could be done. Or Facilitator could symbolize the staff's appreciation of the participants' hard work by offering them flowers and singing some appropriate song.
Visual Aid M 2 - 28: Marker: Synthesis for Module 2
<section>7</section>
Module 3: Basic elements in the establishment and maintenance of micro-enterprises
Topic 1: Causes of success or failure of a business
Activity 1: Lin's cabbage garden
Activity 2: Chu's cabbage garden
Topic 2: My business plan
Activity 1: My proposed business
Activity 2: My marketing plan
Activity 3: My production plan
Activity 4: My management plan
Activity 5: My investment plan
Activity 6: My projected net cash
Topic 3: Important business records
Activity 1: Cash record
Topic 4: Synthesis of module 3
Module 3: Basic elements in the establishment and maintenance of micro-enterprises
MODULE 3: BASIC ELEMENTS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF MICRO-ENTERPRISES
MODULE 3: VISUAL AIDS, CASES, FORMS
VISUAL AIDS
M3 - 1:
Factors which led to Lin's Success In Her Business
Factors which Led to the Failure of Chu's Business
Important Considerations for A Successful Business
List of Micro-Enterprises to be Undertaken by Individuals
Ms. Zhang's Net Cash Income
Ms. Wang's Cash Record
Plastic Green House for Vegetables
CASES
M3 - 1:
Lin's Cabbage Garden
Chu's Cabbage Garden
Zhang's Potato Starch Processing Business
FORMS
M3 - 1:
Marketing Aspect of My Business Plan
Production Plan for Year___
Organization and Management Plan
Investment Plan
Net Cash Income
Cash Record
MODULE 3: BASIC ELEMENTS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF MICRO-ENTERPRISES
INTRODUCTION
This Module is intended to equip participants with the knowledge, attitudes and skills in planning, implementing and evaluating their chosen micro-enterprise. It also helps them to go through the steps of making a simple feasibility study of their chosen micro-enterprise
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES
At the end of 15.5 hours, participants will have been able to:
1. Identify the causes of why business succeed or fail;
2. Internalize important principles in starting and running a business;
3. Prepared a simple Business Plan for their chosen micro-enterprise as the basis for their application for funding from their Group Capital Fund and Project Revolving Fund;
4. Internalized the need and applied the basic skills in keeping a cash record.
Topic 1: Causes of success or failure of a business
Background/Rationale
In general, the poor cannot take unnecessary risks. Their resources and condition are such that they do not have enough to be able to incur losses. If they experience failure, they lose more than their material resources. This erodes their own self-confidence. Furthermore, failure in a project which is associated with external assistance, reinforces their lack of confidence in external agents. It is important there for that rural women have safeguards when they engage in micro-enterprise development. That success and not failure results in their micro-enterprise undertaking since this involves their own money and other resources.
This topic therefore gives the participants an opportunity to examine the factors contributing to success or failure of a micro-enterprise.
Output Objectives
At the end of 2 hours, participants will have:
Identified factors which cause success or failure of a micro-enterprise or business.
Activity 1: Lin's cabbage garden
Time
1 hour
Methodology:
Case Study/Discussion/Lecture
Step
Preparations:
Case M 3 - 1: Lin's Cabbage Garden; Visual Aid M 3 -1.
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this Activity by saying that we are now ready to learn more about factors which contribute to the success or failure of a micro-enterprise. Capital fund to start a micro-enterprise, will be available through group savings and the project loan. Availability of funds alone is not sufficient preparations. We have to make sure that the micro-enterprise we choose to borrow money for should succeed. More than anyone else, we are sure that the rural women themselves would want their micro-enterprise to succeed.
Task Instructions
2. Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 women and reads Case M 3 - 1: Lin's Cabbage Garden.
3. After reading the Case, Facilitator asks the group to discuss what they have learned from the Case.
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
(a) Is Lin's business successful?
(b) If so what are the factors which contributed to her success?
4. Sub-groups report results of their discussion.
5. Facilitator summarizes the results of their discussions under the following headings:
(a) Marketing
(b) Financing
(c) Production
(d) Management
(e) Self-reliance
6. Important Pointers for facilitator in synthesizing the results of this Activity is found in Visual Aid M 3 - 1.
Case M 3 -1: "Lin's Cabbage Garden".
Lin is a farmer in the Dazhai village in Inner Mongolia. She has 2 children. Her husband works as a factory worker.
Lin tills 5 mu of rice land. For many year she has been farming rice and has not made good profits.
Because of her very low profits from cultivating rice, she thought about planting vegetables. But before she made a decision, Lin made a careful survey in the market of which types of vegetables are in demand and commands higher price. She went to several market places and found out that cabbage sells at a very high price and were in high demand.
She went to an agricultural technician from the Ministry of Food and Agriculture and asked how cabbage is grown. Fortunately there was a workshop to be given on cabbage for 2 days. She attended the 2 day workshop and learned how to raise cabbage. Since the workshop was basically conducted through demonstration and field practicum, Lin learned how to plant, water, fertilize, weed and harvest cabbage. She also learned that on 5 mu of land, she will need 200 yuan for land preparation, fertilizers, chemicals, labor and other incidental expenses.
Lin has only 100 yuan. She went to her parents and requested for a loan of 100 yuan at 2% interest per month. Then she went to the market place and secured the commitments from buyers for her cabbage produce. With a ready market for her cabbage, she started to grow cabbage in her land. She religiously followed what she had learned from the workshop et the Ministry of Food and Agriculture. Lin recorded all her production expenses on cabbage production.
After 3 months, she started harvesting cabbage and selling them to her buyers. She also recorded all her sales. Her total sales amounted to 600 yuan. She made a profit of 400 yuan. Out of the profit, she paid her loan of 100 yuan to her parents including the interest. All the rest of the profit, she reinvested in cabbage production by renting an additional 5 mu of land.
Visual Aid M 3 - 1
Factors Which Led to Lin's Success in Her Business
(a) Marketing
 Lin conducted a market survey;
 She determined the demand and price of cabbage;
 She secured her sales through negotiations
(b) Production
 Lin attended workshop in production of cabbage;
 She knows the proper practices involved in cabbage production from land preparation to harvesting of produce;
(c) Financing
 Lin used her savings and secured a loan;
 Lin reinvested all her earnings in cabbage so she can expand her business;
(d) Management
 Lin took care of all stages of production according to what she learned from her workshop (land preparation to harvesting);
 She kept a record of her transactions.
(e) Self-reliance principle
 Lin has the principle of self-reliance, since she showed initiative or thinking about something new by herself;
 Lin was realistic in that the micro-enterprise she chose was small? relatively
 low risk and can be managed together with her other tasks;
 relatively simple technology and low investment;
 relatively short production-cycle (less than a year), so quick return of investment;
 contribute to cash income;
 Because Lin succeeded, her confidence and enthusiasm has increased;
 Lin's management skills have improved because now she has first hand experience;
 she has learned a new technological skill.
Activity 2: Chu's cabbage garden
Time:
1 hour
Methodology:
Case Study/Lecture/ Discussion
Steps:
Preparations:
Case M 3 - 2: Chu's Cabbage Garden; Visual Aid M 3 - 2.
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this Activity by saying that now that we have analyzed the factors which led to the success of Lin's business or micro-enterprise, let us examine another Chu's case, if she also has considered the factors which could lead to success in her business.
Task Instructions
2. Using the same sub-grouping as in Activity 1, Facilitator reads Case M 3 - 2: " Chu's Cabbage Garden".
3. Facilitator gives guide questions.
Guide Questions
(On Newsprint)
(a) Is Chu's business a success or failure ? Why ?
(b) What factors contributed to the failure of Chu's micro-enterprise ?
4. Ask the group to present their outputs.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
5. Facilitator summarizes the results of their discussions according to the following headings:
(a) Marketing
(b) Financial
(c)Production
(d) Management
(e) Self-Reliance
6. For important Pointers see Visual Aid M 3 - 2.
Case M 3 - 2: Chu's Cabbage Garden
Chu is another farmer from the same Dazhai village in Inner Mongolia. Her husband is a drunkard. Chu has been tilling rice for the last 10 years. Just like the other farmers, her profits from rice production is low.
Chu heard the news that her friend Lin, realized good profit from planting cabbage. Because of this Chu decided to plant cabbage. She borrowed 140 yuan from her relatives to start a 3-mu cabbage plot.
Unlike Lin, Chu did not record her expenses. She even used 20 yuan from her loan to buy dresses. Due to this, her budget fell short and she was not able to buy all the fertilizer requirement for the cabbage. Moreover, because cabbage production is new to her, she simply thought that cabbage growing is the same with rice. She left the cabbage plantation to her husband to do who, thinking that this could be cared for like rice, irrigated the plants excessively and about 1/4 of her cabbage died.
After 3 months, she harvested her cabbage. Because they lack the proper care and management, her cabbage did not grow well. The worse part is that because the quality of her cabbage was low, buyers did not want to buy her product at a good price. Her total sales thus, amounted to only 100 yuan.
Visual aid M 3 - 2
Factors which Led to Chu's Failure in Her Business
Marketing
 She did not go to the market to check the demand for her cabbage;
 She had no contact for potential buyer of her product.
Production
 She had no knowledge or skill about cabbage - growing, that is why her yield was low and poor in quality.
Financing
 She spent the money intended for investment in her business for things which were not planned for and were not income - generating (dresses). This is why there was not enough money left to buy necessary things for production.
 She did not keep any records.
 She cannot repay her loan.
Management
 Because she did not have the proper knowledge, she did not understand the needs of the product;
 She showed little interest in her project, she even left her husband to do some tasks, who also did not know much about cabbage.
Self-Reliance related factors
 Because she failed, her confidence with herself now is even lower than before she engaged in the cabbage enterprise;
 She would tend to blame her husband and therefore she is beginning to acquire traits of not taking responsibility for her actions (dependency culture);
 She did not learn new skills in planting cabbage and managing her new business (her dependency reinforced).
Topic 2: My business plan
Background/Rationale
At this stage of the workshop process, participants have some general and basic understanding of factors which influence success or failure of a micro-enterprise and the basic elements in engaging in business. Making a business plan is one of the basic elements for the success of the business. It is the basis for deciding whether the intended business is profitable or not.
In this topic, participants will learn to make a simple business plan for their own specific micro-enterprise. These are however very preliminary. It is important for the Facilitator to understand that this is a relatively new area of knowledge both for Facilitator as well as for participants. Even if the outputs are very rough, what is important is that the participants would have broken their own apprehensions.
At the end of this Topic, Facilitator tells participants that the WG Loans Committee with help from Field Workers will work with them on their Business Plan some time after the workshop. Their outputs therefore will be considered notes.
Participants will be reminded that at this stage they already know from Module 2 about the Group Capital Fund and the Project Revolving Fund as two possible sources for funding their Business proposal, besides their own resources.
At this stage, what is important is that each one should have a preliminary Business Plan.
Output Objectives
1. By the end of 5.5 hours participants will have initial skills to draft a Business Plan;
2. Each participant will have accomplished their preliminary Business Plan.
Activity 1: My proposed business
Time
1.5 hour
Methodology
Group Task/ Individual Tasks/Discussion/Lecture
Output
Individual Notes for Business Plans
Steps
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 3 - 3; Visual Aid M 3 - 4.
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator asks participants whether they agree that a business can only be considered successful if it makes a profit. When participants agree, Facilitator then gives the definition of business.
A business is any undertaking which involves the production of goods and/or services to obtain a profit by selling these goods and/or services.
2. Facilitator asks participants to give examples of the kind of businesses they know Write the examples on the blackboard Then explain that the businesses can be divided in the following categories Write down the categories and ask participants for examples under each category.
a Production:
producing goods for selling, e.g. tobacco growing, sheep raising. The profit comes from selling the produce at a higher price than it costs to produce it.
b. Processing/manufacturing:
converting raw materials into finished product, e.g. processing wheat into flower. The profit comes from selling the produce at a higher price than it costs to produce it..
c. Trading:
buying and selling of the same product(s), e.g. grocery shop, market stall. The profit comes from selling the goods at a higher price than they were bought.
d. Services:
main line of business is providing a service e.g. barber shop, transportation. The profit comes from selling the service at a higher price than it costs to produce it.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
3. Facilitator then continues saying that in the previous Topic we analyzed what factors makes a business succeed or fail. Lin's business is successful, because she studied and prepared well before she started her business and she managed it properly. That is why she was able to make a profit and Chu did not.
From this we learn that if we want to start a business, we first need to carefully consider what we want to do and how we will do it. We need to be reasonably sure that we can make a profit.
Task Instructions
4. We shall now start applying what we have learned to make our own individual Business Plan. Together, let us go over the steps in Business Planning. Let us compare this to planning for a meal. This Visual Aid will help us analyze the elements of business planning in a systematic way. I want you to come up with examples as we go along. I will write on the blackboard the answers you will give me as we go along. (Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 3-3)
5. Facilitator tells the participants to apply what we have learned from the Cases of Lin and Chu in the previous Activities in answering the questions.
6. We look into the production aspect (good cooking skills, materials needed), the marketing aspect (no food stall in the village, knowing the customer, good location, quality service), the financial aspect (investment needed, available capital), and the management aspect (husband and sister in law can help).
7. Facilitator continues and says that asking oneself these questions is also very helpful because we can find out what other information we need (in this case especially about the marketing aspect, number of customers and the pricing) before we can make a decision.
Task Instructions
Group Task Guide
(On newsprint)
(a) Consider these questions and apply them to the enterprise you are thinking of engaging in.
(b) Form into sub-groups of 5 - 7 women.
(c) You are given 30 minutes to share your ideas with each other.
(d) After sharing your ideas with each other, write down for yourself your own ideas about your own business.
(e) You have 15 minutes to write down your ideas.
(f) Use the headings in Visual Aid M 3 - 3 and write them on the blackboard.
Facilitator repeats the questions once more using Visual Aid M 3 - 3 after she gives the Group Task Guide.
Note that putting them in sub-groups helps in clarifying their own thoughts on the matter, before they develop their Business Plans in more detail.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
8. During the sub-group discussions, Facilitator and Monitors go around and assist individuals in the above Activity. This task is very important. Help the illiterates, who may be clear of what they want to do, but are not able to write it down. If they are having a difficult time, Facilitator and Monitors should "tutor", meaning take one person at a time and help them articulate what they want to do and how they want to do it.
9. Facilitator should realize that at this stage, individuals are not yet very clear with their own Business Plans. This Activity "softens" them so to speak for the next Activity, in which the critical aspects in business planning are thought through in more detail.
What we want out of this activity therefore is not necessarily a complete and good plan.
Task Instructions
10. After 45 minutes, the Staff consolidate the participants' outputs, using Visual Aid M 3 4.
11. This consolidated output is presented in newsprint to the participants. Facilitator should do this presentation by going over the headings of the Visual Aid and making highlights and from time to time asking for confirmation from the participants. Facilitator should be showing her appreciation for the outputs, since this has been very difficult for the participants.
12. Facilitator reminds participants to hold on to what they have written as their answers to the above questions, because they will need these in the next Activity.
Note: It is very important that they have the outputs written.
Instructions for Facilitator (4)
13. Facilitator ends the session by saying that here now is a list of projects as a basis for a proposal for funding from our Group Capital Fund and the Project Revolving Fund. That we have taken time to preliminarily assess the various aspects of business in this activity, so that it would not be so difficult to actually accomplish the application for funding from the Group Capital Fund and the Project Revolving Fund in the next activity.
Visual Aid 3-3
Important Considerations in Planning
PLANNING FOR MEAL
PLANNING FOR BUSINESS
What Food do I want to make? e. g. special noodle soup
What Business do I want to do? e.g. noodle stall
Why do I think this is a good idea?
Why do I think this is a good idea?
I went to make something special for festival day end my family likes this dish very much
I am a good cook and there is no food stall in the village. Also, my place is right at the main road, so I think many people will like to come, so that I can make a good profit.
How much will I make?
How much will I produce/sell?
Except for my family members, I want to give some to my old neighbors, all together I will make for 15 bowls
I will make two kinds o noodles. Each day, I expect about 15 customers for each kind.
What do I need to make it?
What do I need to operate the food stall?
Materials: stove, fuel, pan, knife, ingredients,
Materials: place, stove, fuel, pan, knives; bowl singredients, table, stools, bowls, glasses, chopsticks, etc.
Skills: Know which ingredients, how many,
Skills: cooking, cleanliness, friendly to how to mix, how long to cook, etc. customers, know what people like to eat, know where to get ingredients at reasonable price, etc.
Labor: can do it myself, have time
Labor: my daughter in law can help with serving and cleaning during busy hours
How much money do I need?
How much money do I need?
I have most of the materials,
I only need to I need to buy some of the ingredients at the cost of 15 rmb
I have a suitable building, stove and enough cooking utensils. I need 3 tables with stools, which my husband can make for 200 rmb, and I have to buy 10 bowls, 50 chopsticks, 10 glasses at a total of 50 rmb. For ingredients and fuel I need 200 rmb
Do I have the money?
Do I have the money?
yes
I have 250 rmb and need 450 rmb, so I will have to borrow 200 rmb
Shall I do it?
Shall I do it?
I have the money, the materials, the skills and the time, and my family will appreciate it, so I will do it.
I am confident that I can run a food stall. My daughter-in-law wants to support me, but I have to invest 450 rmb and I need to be sure that enough people come and are willing to pay my price before I can decide to do it. I first need to compute how much a meal will cost and then ask people whether they would become my customer. Only when I am sure of my profit will I borrow
Visual Aid M 3 4
List of Micro-Enterprises to be undertaken by Individuals
(Consolidation Form)
Name
Type of Business
Financing
Duration of Loan
Self
Revolving Fund
(a) Production Projects
etc.
Sub-total
(b) Processing/Manufacturing Projects
etc.
Sub total
(c) Training/Mechanizing Projects
etc.
Sub-total
(d) Service Projects
etc.
Sub-total
Grand Total
Activity 2: My marketing plan
Time
1 hour
Methodology
Discussion
Steps
Preparations:
Form M 3 - 1: Each participant should have one copy
Guide Questions on newsprint
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces the activity by saying that participants now have quite a clear idea about the business they want to undertake. Although there may be things we need to check further, we have a good basis to start preparing a loan application.
Task Instructions
2. Facilitator makes sub-groups of 5-7 women. These sub-groups should be as homogeneous as possible, i. e. women who want to plant vegetables are in one group Those who want to raise sheep in another. Etc The idea here is to give members a chance to consult with each other in detailing their business plan. Make sure there is a Monitor to help illiterates, or pair one illiterate with a literate person.
3. Facilitator explains that in this Activity participants will start refining the business plan proposal. First we will look at the marketing plan. No matter how good the product or service is, if we cannot sell it well, our business will fail.
4. Facilitator then asks the homogeneous sub-groups to compare their notes of the marketing aspects. Write the guide questions below on the blackboard or newsprint and explain. Ask participants to discuss the guide questions and ask each to write the conclusions for her own business.
5. Each participant fills in her own Form M 3 - 1. Guide Questions should help her in thinking through what she wants to write on this Form.
6. Give the groups 15 minutes for discussion. Go around to assist and make notes on issues youneed to clarify during the plenary discussion.
Guide Questions
(On newsprint)
(a) Customers
How sure are you about the potential buyer(s) of your product(s)?
Where and to whom will you sell?
Why would they buy from you?
What makes your product/service attractive?
How do you make your product known?
Is the buyer reliable, does he pay the agreed price?
Are there others who sell the same product/service? What is their price/quality?
(b) Price
What price can you charge? How sure are you that you can get this price?
Are there different prices for different quality?
(c) Volume
How much can you sell of each product/service you intend to sell?
How much of each quality do you intend to sell?
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
7. In this Activity Facilitator should realize that for most participants, this is the first time for them to think about these questions. The importance of the Activity is that participants make a start in thinking their business through. Exchanging ideas with others in the group could lessen their apprehensions. Facilitator plays a big part in building their confidence, if she is encouraging and helpful.
8. Assure them of future assistance in further preparation of their business plans and encourage more discussion in the group after this workshop.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
9. Conclude this Activity by asking two to three persons (perhaps the shy ones) to share with the group their feelings and what changes they have experienced in the way they think about doing something new like this process of learning about their Marketing Plan.
10. Encourage them to talk with potential buyers after the workshop and check out some of what they have written into the business plans.
Form M 3 - 1: Marketing Aspects of My Business Plan
1. Where will you sell your produce (location)?___
2. To whom will you sell (specify name of company and address):___
Do you have a contract with the buyer ?___
3. What is/are their buying price(s) and your expected volume to be sold? (If buyer requires specific quality, state the pricing per quality specification and estimated volume per quality).
Quality Control
Unit Price
Expected Volume to be sold
TOTAL
4. Have you sold to this buyer before?___ If yes, what was the previous pricing and volume sold?___ Since when?___ . Do you know of persons in the village who have sold to this buyer before (Please name them):
5. Do you expect changes in the pricing you stated in #3 within the year?___ If yes, what price changes do you expect?___
6. What additional costs will you incur in selling and delivering your produce to your buyer? (e.g. sacks, transport, etc.)
Item
Amount
7. Do you know of alternative buyers? If yes, please list them, their location and buying paces.
Buyer
Location/Address
Unit Price
Activity 3: My production plan
Time
1.5 hour
Methodology
Group Task/ Individual Tasks/Discussion/Lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Form M 3 - 2: Each participant should have one copy of this Form
Guide Questions on newsprint or blackboard
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (I)
1. Facilitator introduces the Activity by saying that we will now go into the next part of our business plan. We will plan the production and management of our business in more detail.
2. Facilitator explains that we will first plan the materials that are needed to produce our product or service. There are two kinds of materials. Those that are used up every time the output volume is produced and those that can be used for more than one production cycle. For example, every time a crop is produced, we need new fertilizer, seeds, etc., but materials such as machines, buildings, etc. can be used over a longer period of time. The first type of materials is called non-durable materials, the second type are called fixed assets.
3. Facilitator asks participants to give more examples of the two categories for their own type of business and writes these on the blackboard, until the difference is clear.
Task Instructions (1)
4. Facilitator then asks sub-groups to discuss what kind of materials are needed to operate the business they have in mind, not only those they need to buy, but also those they already have. Tell participants that it is not necessary at this stage to quantify the volume and price. That can be done later.
5. Give the sub-groups of 5 - 7 women 15 minutes to discuss and write down their outputs. Ask each sub-group to report on newsprint using the following format:
Output of Discussion Format
(On newsprint)
1. Name of Business:___
2. Materials needed for my Business:___ (type of business)
2.1. Fixed Assets
2.2. Non-durable Materials
3. Ask each sub-group to report and ask other participants to comment. First ask to comment whether the materials are listed in the right category. When that is clear, ask to comment whether the list is complete.
4. Facilitator then asks sub-groups to discuss how much of each of the materials they need to produce the projected output volume. For example: if it takes 60 jin of pig feed to raise a pig and the entrepreneur wants to raise 4 pigs, she will need 240 jin. Ask participants to also discuss the price per unit of the material and from whom they will buy. Participants should list the fixed assets and non-durable materials separately.
Task Instructions (2 ]
5. Ask each participant to write her own list. Make sure the weaker and illiterate participants get help. Give then 30 minutes to do this.
Task Instructions (3)
6. Facilitator then explains the other aspects in planning of production. Participants age given a copy of Form M 3 - 2: Production Plan for Year___ . They are told that they can use this for the Production Aspect of their Business Plan. They will be given a set of Guide Questions to help them think these items through.
7. Write the Guide Questions the blackboard or newsprint and ask sub-groups to discuss and write down the conclusions for their own individual enterprise.
Guide Questions
(On newsprint)
(1) Labor
Which time of the year is most busy? Can family members help or do you need to hire labor? If you need to pay for labor, how many days at what rate? For what tasks do you need help from others? Do they have the skills?
(2) Use of facilities
Do you need to rent land or other facilities e. g. market stall, storage? If yes, what is the rent or fee? Will you have costs such as electricity, water? How much?
(3) Other expenses
Will you have expenses in selling and delivering your product, meaning transportation costs, packing materials? How much? Do you have any other expenses, such as tax, administration costs, etc.? How much?
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
8. Facilitator concludes this Activity by reflecting back to the group what they have accomplished. This is very important as a means to build up their sense of confidence in what they are doing. This can motivate them further to continue with the detailed work entailed in the rest of the Activities under this Topic.
Form M 3-2
Borrower
Production Plan for Year___
Location:___
Land Size/No of Heads:___
Crop/Livestock:
Land Description 4/___
Production Inputs 2/
Labor Requirement
Schedule/Months
Activities 1/
Item
Quantity
Unit Price
Total Cost
Acquisition 3/
# of Workers
Wage Rate
# of Days
Total Cost
Cash
Credit
Notes:
1/ List all activities chronologically from production up to harvesting/post-harvest.
2/ List all inputs required such as seedings fertilizers, pesticides or stocks/chicks, feed and chemicals.
3/ Check if such will be obtained on credit (to be deducted from sales) or to be bought in cash.
4/ For land description, please state whether low-land irrigated, non-irrigated/rainfed or upland.
Activity 4: My management plan
Time:
30 Minutes
Methodology:
Group Task/ Individual Task/Discussion/Lecture
Steps:
Preparations:
Form Aid M 3 - 3: Each participant should have on copy of this Form Guide Questions on newsprint
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator recaps from Activities on (a) Marketing Aspects; (b) production aspects of the business or enterprise which each one has chosen. She relates this to the fact that the participants have already accomplished some significant steps in planning their business. She encourages them by saying that in the beginning, the participants did not think that they could do this, but that they have proven to themselves that they can do so. This is what we mean by take small steps to attain self-reliance.
2. Facilitator then continues and says that we still have some more steps to complete our individual business plans. She explains further that in this Activity we will deal with the management plan of the business we have chosen.
3. Facilitator reminds the participants that in Lin's Case our conclusion was that she was successful because she not only had planned her business well, she also managed it very well. She did the buying and selling herself, kept her business finances separate from the household, was skillful in growing cabbage, etc. In short, she was fully in control of her business and thus self-reliant.
Task Instructions
4. Facilitator tells the participants that now we will think through the organization and management requirements of the business we have chosen.
5. Facilitator distributes Form M - 3 - 3 to each participant and tells them that with the help of Guide Questions they can fill in the information about their business in this Form. They are encouraged to consult with their friends and group members. They have 15 minutes to do this. After 15 minutes, participants can compare their notes with each other and help one another with constructive comments. Facilitator and Monitor will be available to help them with comments and suggestions.
6. Facilitator posts the Guide Questions or writes on the blackboard.
Guide Questions
(On newsprint)
(1) Skills
Did you do this kind of business before, do you have the skills?
If not, how will you acquire the skills? Will you keep records of your business? do you know how to keep a cashbook, how To prepare an income statement? if not, do you want to learn? how?
(2) Management
Do you have enough time to manage the business?
Who will do the buying and selling?
Who will keep the cash?
Who will keep the records?
Who will make the product?
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
7. Facilitator ends this session by further encouraging the group. She could single out one or two persons who at the early stages felt they could not do these exercises but are now doing well.
Form M 3 - 3: Organization and Management Plan
1. If household-managed
a. From your family, including yourself, who will be involved and what will be their role(s)/tasks?
Family Member
Task/Responsibilities
b. Do you intend to keep financial records for the project?___ Do you know how to prepare cash book?___ . If no, when do you wish to be trained?___
2. If group managed
a. Who are group members involved in the project and what are their tasks and responsibilities?
Name of Member
Task/Responsibilities
b. Do you intend to keep financial records?___ Does your assigned accountant/bookkeeper know how to prepare cash book?___ If no, when does your group wish to be trained?___
c. How often do you plan to meet as a group to monitor/evaluate the project?___
d. Do you intend to deposit cash balances in the bank?___ If yes, who are the signatories?___ If no, who will keep the cash?___
Activity 5: My investment plan
Time:
1 hour
Methodology:
Group Task/ Individual Tasks/Illustrations/Discussion/Lecture
Steps:
Preparations:
Form M 3 - 4: Each participant should have a copy
Guide Questions on newsprint
Materials:
marker pens; news print
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator explains that in the previous Activities, participants already have thought through and listed what they need to produce the intended product or services in terms of materials, labor and other expenses. In this Activity, we will learn how to write this down systematically in what is called an Investment Plan.
Task Instructions
2. Facilitator posts a newsprint with information as in Form M 3-4. She explains this Form using important points listed below.
Important Points
 The Investment Plan details exactly how much capital is needed to be able to start the business. It details information as to what purpose and from what source it these funds are to come from.
 In the Investment Plan only the Fixed Assets that need to be bought are listed. E. g. in the case of the food stall, the building is needed, but is already there. Only when costs will be made to improve/change the building, are these to be listed here.
 Working capital is the capital that is needed each time the intended output volume is produced. In Lin's case for instance, the costs of fertilizer, seeds, labor would be recorded here. In the Food Stall Case, the costs of fuel and ingredients are listed here, as well as the payment of the daughter in law. Costs of use of facilities, such as water, electricity, are also fisted here.
 Other expenses are expenses incurred in selling and delivery, transportation, tax, etc. In Lin's Case for instance she may have expenses in sending her produce to the market. In the Food Stall Case she may have expenses, such as bags for customers who want to take home leftovers.
3. Facilitator then asks each sub-group to choose one individual in their group whose investment plan they will discuss. Facilitator tells the group that in order to encourage the shy ones or the ones who say they have a difficult time should be chosen in each group.
4. Give the sub-groups 20 minutes to discuss and write the output on newsprint. During the discussion Facilitator/Monitors go around to assist. Make sure the chosen individual provides the information and understands/agrees to the output.
5. Ask the chosen individual from each group to present (if illiterate, read the output item by item and give her time to explain). Ask other participants to comment.
6. When participants are clear on how to fill in the information on the Investment Plan give another 20 minutes for each one to complete their individual Forms.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
7. Facilitator ends this session by again giving the participants some encouragement and motivation to continue with the work. She reminds them once more to make sure that they keep their filled in Forms, since they need these for other Activities during the workshop and that they will need these when they actually apply for loans from the Revolving Fund.
Form M 3 - 4: Investment Plan
Cost Items
Total Amount
Own Savings
Loan from Group
Loan from Group
A. Fixed Assets
(Equip., Facilities, Tools)
B. Production Costs
Inputs:
Hired Labor:
Use of facilities:
C. Other Expenses
TOTAL
Equipment, facilities, tools which can be used for more than one production cycle.
Equipment/ Machine
Total Amount
Own Savings
Loan from Group
Loan from Group
Activity 6: My projected net cash
Time:
2 hours
Methodology:
Case presentation/ Illustrations/Discussion
Steps:
Preparations:
Case M 3 - 3; Visual Aid M 3 - 5; Form M 3 - 5.
Materials:
maker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this Activity by saying that at this stage we need to analyze what we have detailed in the various aspects of our business plans to see if we will really make a profit from our chose business. In this Activity we will learn how to compute whether we make a profit or whether we lose in this business. As we said earlier, we go into business to make a profit, not just so we have something to do.
2. All these steps we have taken to detail various aspects of our business plan is to help us minimize the risks we take in engaging in a business.
3. Facilitator explains that profit is income minus costs. For instance Lin sold the cabbage for 600 rmb (income) and she spent 200 rmb on fertilizer, seeds and labor (costs). Her profit therefore is 400 rmb. This amount was available for her buy new fertilizer, seeds, etc. and for repayment of her loan.
4. Facilitator then shows the computation using Form M 3 - 5: Net Cash Income
5. Facilitator continues to explain that the Net Cash Income is the cash that is available each time the projected output volume is produced and sold, e. g. in Lin's case for each time she tills the 5 mu with cabbage.
6. Facilitator then explains that the Costs of Goods Sold are only those costs that recur each time the output volume is produced. Costs of fixed assets are not included her, because fixed assets do not need to be bought each time the output volume is produced.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
7. Facilitator posts Case M 3 - 3: Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Business. She asks one participant to read this aloud.
8. Using Ms Zhang's Case, Facilitator then asks participants to supply the answers using Form M 3 - 5 format.
9. Facilitator then puts Visual Aid M 3- 5 on the wall and explains the correct answers on Ms Zhang's Net Cash Income projection. Facilitator does this very slowly and step by step so that the participants have enough time to absorb the ideas. 9. Facilitator further explains that Net Cash Income is the amount of cash that is earned each time the output volume is produced and sold.
10. Ms. Zhang's Net Cash Income is 315 rmb. She has recovered all the production costs and other expenses from the total income from the enterprise and has the Net Cash Income as reserve funds either for payment of loans and interest or for use as additional working capital in the next cycle.
Task Instructions
11. Facilitator then tells the participants that now we will do our own Net Cash Income Statement for the business we have chosen.
12. Facilitator explains that in making their marketing and production plan participants, they have already listed all the information that is needed to make the computation of Net Cash Income for their own business.
13. Facilitator asks sub-groups to help each other in writing the Net Cash Income Statement.
14. Give 20 minutes for each participant to complete Form M 3 - 5 for their individual business.
15. Ask some participants to present their computation. Invite others to ask questions and to make suggestions.
16. Give another 10 minutes for each one to make corrections.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
17. Facilitator ends this session by telling participants that the Loans Committee, together with the WPD Field Workers will review these information on their business plans, some time after the workshop and come back to them individually for further consultations.
18. Participants have accomplished a lot by the end of this Activity and should be commended, considering that they are not used to this. But this is part of learning new skills and another big step towards achieving our goal of self-reliance.
Form M 3 - 5: Net Cash Income
Sales
Other Income
Total Income
rmb
Less: Costs of Goods Sold
Materials
rmb
Paid Labor
rmb
Use of Facilities
rmb
Total Costs of Goods Sold
rmb
Gross Profit
rmb
Less: other expenses
rmb
Net Cash Income
rmb
Case M 3 - 3: Zhang's Potato Starch Processing Business
1. Ms. Zhang will buy potatoes and process this into starch.
Where should we list the costs of buying the potatoes? (cost of materials)
Where should we list the income from sales of the starch? (sales)
2. Ms. Zhang also needs water and electricity for the processing.
Where should we write the costs? (use of facilities)
3. Ms. Zhang will pay 20 rmb to her daughter who helps with cleaning the potatoes.
Where should we write the costs? (labor cost)
4. Ms. Zhang will sell the starch to the local vermicelli factory, but has to pay for the transportation costs.
Where should we write the costs? (other expenses)
5. Ms. Zhang will invest in a grinder that can be used for 10 years. Where should we write the costs? (the grinder is fixed asset, costs of which are not included in computation Net Cash Income)
6. Ms. Zhang needs to add a chemical for better quality of starch.
Where should we write the costs? (cost of materials)
Visual Aid M 3 - 5: Ms. Zhang's Net Cash Income
Sales:
Quality A starch: 100 jin at 3 rmb/jin
300 rmb
Quality B starch: 80 jin at 2.5 rmb/jin
200 rmb
Other Income
Total Income
500 rmb
Less: Costs of Goods Sold
Materials
400 jin potatoes at 0.3 rmb/jin
120 rmb
0.5 jin chemical at 30 rmb/jin
15 rmb
Paid Labor
20 rmb
Use of Facilities water and electricity
10 rmb
Total Costs of Goods Sold
rmb
Gross Profit
345 rmb
Less: other expenses
Transportation
30 rmb
Net Cash Income
315 rmb
Topic 3: Important business records
Background/Rationale
Once individuals undertake their micro-enterprise, during their operation, there are basic business records which need to keep. In this Topic participants will be given an opportunity to learn basic skills in a basic record tool - the Cash Record.
Output Objectives
By the end of 2 hours participants would have:
Internalized basic skills in making Cash Records or how to keep a "cash book".
Activity 1: Cash record
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Illustration/discussion/lecture
Steps
Preparations:
Form M 3 - 6 Each Participant should have a copy
Visual Aid M 3 - 6; Visual Aid M 3 - 7; Illustrations; Practice Exercise
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint.
Facilitator Lectures (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by saying that once we are engaged in our business, there are important recording requirements which could make us better business women. Facilitator refers to the Case: Lin's Cabbage Garden and says that the participants themselves mentioned that Lin's conscientious record keeping was one of the reasons for the success of her business. Facilitator asks some participants to tell why it is important to keep records.
Important Points
Only by keeping records, can we know how much we earn from our enterprise. Without records, we could be doing business without realizing that we have already incurred losses.
By keeping records we will notice changes in prices quickly. We can then take more immediate action. We can for example look for another supplier or buyer. If your engaged in trading, you could adjust the price quickly when there are changes in the market price. For a vegetable grower it may be beneficial to write down the market price of different vegetables every day, so that she is able to determine the best time of the year the demand for certain vegetables is highest.
By keeping records we can get to know how we are doing in production. e. g. is the quality of our product better than last time; have fewer animals died; did l sell more jin/mu, etc.?
Keeping records is also useful for planning e. g. what is the best time to market pigs or to buy fertilizer; when should be the best time to buy more fertilizer, etc.
When group members keep records, they can compare each other's business results and learn from each other. E. g. how to improve production or which buyers pay better.
2. Facilitator continues and emphasizes the fact that it is important to record every time money comes in or goes out of the business. For this we use the Cash Record.
3. Facilitator distributes Form M 3 - 6: Cash Record.
4. Facilitator illustrates the principle with Ms. Wang's Chicken Rasing Business.
Facilitator's Illustration
1. Facilitator starts:
Ms. Wang starts a chicken raising business. She has 120 rmb savings and receives a loan from the women's group of 80 rmb on the first of April.
Explain that her beginning balance is the amount of savings (120 rmb).
The loan is the first cash in of the business.
The remaining balance on April 1 is then 200 rmb.
Write these items and figures in the Cash Record on newsprint.
On April 2 Ms. Wang buys 120 chickens at 1 rmb each.
This is recorded as Cash Out. The remaining balance now is 200 minus 120 is 80 rmb.
2. Group members participate:
2.1. Ask a participant to record on the newsprint the purchase of feed in the total amount of 50 rmb on April 5.
2.2. Ask another participant to record the payment to her neighbor (a boy) who helped two days with the delivery of the chickens and with cleaning the shed after delivering. She pays him 10 rmb per day. She paid on June 10.
2.3. Ask another participant to record the sales of 110 chicken at 4 rmb. She received the payment on June 15.
Facilitator Lectures (2)
3. Ms. Wang's Record shows that she lost 20 chickens (She bought 120, sold 100). She can consider if that is too many and take measures to loose less chickens. Maybe they all died. If so, she may discuss with other group members or with the technician how to prevent next time.
Note that it would have been better if also for the feed it had been better if had known how many jin was bought and at what price.
4. Ms. Wang's Cash Record also shows that she can repay her loan of 80 rmb plus interest in June and still has more than 300 rmb for investment in new chickens.
5. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 3 - 6 as a summary of Ms Wang's Cash Record.
Instructions for Facilitator (3)
6. Facilitator writes on newsprint and reads the following example for the group to practice recording:
Practice Exercise
My cash balance after the last harvest of vegetables is 450 rmb. I borrow 300 rmb at 2% interest per month for 3 months to enlarge the area of vegetables on March 1. On March 10,1995 I bought plastic and paid 300 rmb; bamboo for 100 rmb. On March 30 I bought seeds at 150 rmb and fertilizer at 200 rmb. On May 20 I sold most of my vegetables and received 1,200 rmb. On May 29 I paid back my loan with interest.
7. Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 persons. She asks the sub-groups to record the transactions and make a Cash Record. Ask each sub-group to do this on newsprint. You are given only 15 minutes. This is a contest. Let us see who can finish first with the correct answers.
8. Compare the group outputs and in case of differences let participants discuss and explain to each other what the right answer is.
9. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 3 - 7 as summary for the Practice Exercise.
Facilitator Synthesis
Synthesis: Important Points
In the Cash Record, all the money that comes in or goes out of the business is recorded. The beginning balance is the cash at hand, loans are recorded as cash in, loan repayment and interest is recorded as cash out.
In recording, we should be specific, e. g. how many jin bought at what unit price.
With this Cash Record, I can tell at all times my cash position in my business. Knowing this gives me a level of self confidence and order in the way I do my business. I am establishing a system in the way I work.
Form M 3 - 6: Cash Record
Name entrepreneur:
Month:
Name enterprise:
Year:
Beginning Balance (Cash Status)
Amount:
Cash In
Cash Out
Remaining Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Amount
Date
Visual Aid M 3 - 6: Ms Wang's Cash Record
Beginning
Balance
120 rmb
Savings
Cash In
Cash Out
Remaining Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Loan Women's Group
April 1
Bought 120 chicken each
April 2
feed
April 5
labor, 2 days, Y 10/ day
June 10
sold 100 chickens at Y 4 each
June 15
Visual Aid M 3 - 7: Practice Exercise
Plastic Green House for Vegetable
Beginning
Balance
450 rmb
Savings
Cash In
Cash Out
Remaining Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Loan Women's Group
March 1
plastic
March 10
bamboo
March 10
seeds
March 30
fertilizers
March 30
Sold Vegetables
May 20
repaid
May 29
interest
May 29
Topic 4: Synthesis of module 3
Time:
1 hour
Methodology:
Sharing of Insights and Lessons Learned
Request Participants to Share Their Thoughts
1. Facilitator asks participants to share with the group their own thoughts as a result of the experience of learning in Module 3.
Guide questions:
(a) Please share with us the 3-4 important points which you learned from this Module;
(d) Which among the Activities you feel was or were most helpful to you?
(c) Which among the Activities was or were most difficult for you? Do you feel however, that these were important to you, even if they were difficult?
2. Facilitator ends by thanking the participants for their herd work and praises them for their outputs. She tells them what she herself has learned from all this.
<section>8</section>
Module 4 - F: County work plan group formation component
Topic 1: Preparatory steps in developing the country work plan
Activity 1: Tasks and functions of the field worker reviewed
Activity 2: Planning organization of women's groups
Activity 3: Preparations, documentation and procedures for loan applications.
Activity 4: Group financial records
Topic 2: Developing the county work plan
Activity 1: Developing the county work plan
Module 4 - F: County work plan group formation component
Module 4 - F: County work plan group formation component
MODULE 4 - F: VISUAL AIDS, CASES AND FORMS
VISUAL AIDS
M4 - F- 1
Field Worker's Task Functions
M4 - F- 2
Steps: Loan Application and Agreements
CASES
4 - 1 Task
Planning Number of Groups to Be Organized
4 -1 Output
Planning Number of Groups to Be Organized
FORMS
Form M4 - F- 1
Group Loan Application (Parts 1, 2, 3, 4)
Individual Loan Application
Loan Agreement (with group members)
Township Evaluation Report on Loan Application
Loan Agreement (loans to WG)
Evaluation Report On Loan Applications
Summary: Applications for Approval of Governing Body
Summary: Purpose of Loans
GMF1
Individual Savings Records
GMF2
Individual Loan Record
GF1
Group Savings Record
GF2
Group Loan Record
GF3
Group Repayment Record
GF4
Group Cash Record
GF5
Group Statement of Savings and Loan Operation
MODULE 4 - F: COUNTY WORK PLAN
Background/Rationale
There are two Module 4 in the Manual. One is for Field Workers (4 - F) and the other one is for Women's Groups (4 - W). This particular Module is for Field Workers (4 - F). Work Plan and Action Plan have the same meaning. We use different terminologies for convenience purposes.
Note that there are two Topics in this Module. Topic I contains the preparatory steps before the County Work Plan is to be developed. This has 5 Activities, including the Synthesis. Topic 2 is the Development of the Work Plan proper.
1. The relationship of the Field Worker Work Plan and the Women's Groups Action Plan.
The Field Worker's Work Plan is only a component of the total County Work Plan, since it covers only the activities related to Group Formation and Maintenance. During this workshop, what the Field Workers are asked to develop is a Work Plan for only 6 months. This is by design, so that the Field Worker can: (a) gain experience in developing and executing a Work Plan and use her experience to develop a more relevant one for the next 6 month period; (b) synchronize their Work Plan with the WG groups 6-month period Action Plan; (c) and most importantly, the Field Worker and WG would need to consult with one another by about the fifth month to develop the succeeding 6 - month Work Plan and Action Plan respectively.
This format is intended to establish a system of Work Plan and Action Plan for the project. Note that the Field Worker's Work Plan is a response system to the Action Plan of the WG. Women's Groups activities therefore in large measure determine the Field Worker's Work Plan.
2. What needs to be Reviewed before developing the Field Worker's Work Plan
There are major considerations before Field Worker participants actually develop their own county-specific Work Plans. They are the following:
2.1. Field Worker's Tasks
Our philosophy in the WPD project is one of "partnership" between project management and the rural women in WG. Based on this philosophy each party therefore has obligations and commitments. The Field Worker Tasks and Functions are part of the commitments and obligation of project management.
Before the development of the Work Plan therefore, the Field Worker needs to review these Tasks and Functions.
2.2. Planning Number of WG to be Organized
There are considerations in the planning for the organization of WG. For example, the pre-qualification workshop takes 6 0 - 70 hours per group. Considerations for funds allocation from the revolving fund limits the number of groups to what funds are available. Considerations of the timing of repayments (when funds will be available) in relation to when to schedule workshops for succeeding groups of women. Etc.
23. Preparations for Application for Group Loans
Time sequence considerations need to be made as to when and for what periods would Field Workers need to start and follow through the Applications for Loans from Women's Groups.
2.4. Establishing Financial Records
The Field Workers need to establish the system of recording the financial transactions at WG level. This means training on-the-job for the pertinent officers of the WG.
2.5. Monitoring and Provision of Technical Services.
Field Workers are to monitor and provide technical assistance for WG. This needs to be done at least once a quarter. Field Workers check and assist the members of the WG in the activities which they have committed themselves to in their Action Plan. Major among these are:
(a) Group Savings and Loan operation
Field Workers are to monitor the WG operation of their savings mobilization process and their loan operation. Details and record system as found in Activity 4 in Topic 1 in this Module will help the Field Worker undertake a systematic monitoring of these operations.
(b) MCH/FP operations
The regular scheduling MCH/FP education and services - at least once a quarter for educational sessions and once a year for medical check-up; the motivational activities among members; activating the village clinic so that services are provided, using SDF funds.
(c) Functional Literacy operation
The inventory of those who are illiterate; sessions are regularized; books and materials are provided; SDF funds used as needed; establishing peer group support for study.
(d) Technical Skills Training
The inventory of desired technical skills; coordination with other agencies so that the pertinent and competent extension workers are made available to train the women.
(e) Folk Media
Encouraging women to organize and/or develop their own presentations for special feasts or for their own entertainment; giving ideas which could be useful to women; giving ideas about gender issues which could be used for folk media presentations.
(f) Establishing an Activity Room
Assist the women to secure a room in the village for their use.
(g) Group Organization Development
Using the Project prototype of the " Organizational Development Framework" (ODF). Field Workers will from time to time discuss with the women their progress in attaining their targets set in the ODF.
(h) Group Organizational Functioning
Field Workers need to attend at least 3 group meetings per group a year, especially at the early stages of group development to assist them in the monthly meetings. The WG Standard Agenda provided in Module 2 of this Manual, should be used. This will help systematize the meetings of the WG.
Output Objectives
By the end of 6 - 7 hours participants would have:
1. A clear idea of the considerations in developing their 6 - month county Work Plan as outlined in the above areas of considerations;
2. Developed a 6 - month county specific Work Plan.
Topic 1: Preparatory steps in developing the country work plan
Activity 1: Tasks and functions of the field worker reviewed
Time:
30 Minutes
Methodology:
Discussion/Open Forum
Steps:
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 4 - F - 1
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Introduce this Activity by presenting the Output Objectives of this Module.
2. In orienting the participants to the Activities in the Module, use the "Background/ Rationale" as notes.
Task Instructions
3. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 4 - F - 1: Task Functions of Field Workers. Post on the wall.
4. Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 persons. Group discussion for 15 minutes on the Visual Aid.
Task Guide
(On Newsprint)
Study Visual Aid M 4-F - 1 and list down areas which are not clear to you. We will have an open Forum after 15 minutes.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
5. Facilitator conducts Open Forum to clarify questions from the participants. She clarifies the Tasks of Field Workers. No synthesis needed. Assure participants that some of these will get clearer as we go through the Activities in this Module.
Visual Aid 4 - F -1
Field Worker's Task Functions
Our philosophy in the WPD project is one of "partnership" between project management and the rural women in Women's Groups (WG). Based on this philosophy each party therefore has obligations and commitments. The Field Worker Tasks and Functions are part of the commitments and obligation of project management.
Major task areas of Field Workers are:
1. Conduct pre-qualification workshop (60 - 70 hours) for WG;
2. Assist WG in Application for funds from the revolving fund;
3. Ensure the repayment of the said funds;
4. Assist WG to establish Financial Records and Activity records systems
5. Monitoring and Provision of Technical Services at least once a quarter for each WG with particular emphasis on:
(a) Group Savings and Loan operation
Field Workers are to monitor the WG operation of their savings mobilization process and their loan operation. Details and record system as found in Activity 4 in Topic 1 in this Module will help the Field Worker undertake a systematic monitoring of these operations.
(b) MCH/FP operations
The regular scheduling MCH/FP education and services - at least once a quarter for educational sessions and once a year for medical check-up; the motivational activities among members; activating the village clinic so that services are provided, using SDF funds.
(c) Functional Literacy operation
The inventory of those who are illiterate; sessions are regularized; books and materials are provided; SDF funds used as needed; establishing peer group support for study.
(d) Technical Skills Training
The inventory of desired technical skills; coordination with other agencies so that the pertinent and competent extension workers are made available to train the women.
(e) Folk Media
Encouraging women to organize and/or develop their own presentations for special feasts or for their own entertainment; giving ideas which could be useful to women; giving ideas about gender issues which could be used for folk media presentations.
(f) Establishing an Activity Room
Assist the women to secure a room in the village for their use.
(g) Group Organization Development
Using the Project prototype of the " Organizational Development Framework" (ODF), Field Workers will from time to time discuss with the women their progress in attaining their targets set in the ODF.
(h) Group Organizational Functioning
Field Workers need to attend at least 3 group meetings per group a year, especially at the early stages of group development to assist them in the monthly meetings. The WG Standard Agenda provided in Module 2 of this Manual, should be used. This will help systematize the meetings of the WG.
Activity 2: Planning organization of women's groups
Time:
30 minutes
Methodology:
Discussion/ Case Analysis/Task Group Work/Lecture
Steps:
Preparations:
Case 4 - 1 Task: sufficient copies for each participant or on newsprint
Case 4 - 1 Output: on newsprint
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this Activity by telling participants that there are 3 important elements for successful management of the Project Revolving Fund. She writes these on the blackboard.
1.1. Planning of the number of groups and women who have to be organized to avail of the next repayments.
1.2. Preparation and decision-making on loan applications.
1.3. Monitoring of the use of loans and repayments.
2. Facilitator further explains that the Project Monitoring System includes records for Disbursement and Payment of the Revolving Fund and Social Development Fund. In Activity 4 of this Module, other major issues in monitoring are discussed.
3. In the next two Activities we will focus on the
First Step: The Planning of the Number of Women and WG
Second Step: Procedures for Loan Applications.
4. Since groups are required to save at least 6 months before the loan can be released, it is necessary to plan well ahead of time. If this is not planned well, there will be delays in disbursements. The County Work Plan therefore should be carefully planned against this consideration.
Task Instructions
5. Copies of Case 4 - 1 Task is distributed or presented on newsprint. Participants are asked to carry out the task individually. Give 10 minutes for this task.
6. Ask one participant to present her task output. Ask others to comment. Check whether this is correct against the Case 4 - 1 Output.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
7. Synthesize the Activity by emphasizing points below. Write on the blackboard as you go along in your short lecture.
7.1. The amount of revolving fund that is available for loans to women's groups at a certain date
7.2. The estimated monthly savings of the women members
7.3. The average number of members per group
7.4. The requirement that loans to women's groups are maximum 8 times the group savings
7.5. The requirement of minimum 6 months savings before release of loans to groups, which means that groups have to be organized at least 6 months before the repayments are scheduled.
Case 4-1 (Task)
Planning Number of Groups to be Organized
Repayments are scheduled on the following dates:
1886, January:
100,000 Rmb
1896, September
250,000 Rmb
Groups on average have 20 members, who save 15 Rmb/month.
Task
Fill in the Planning Form below.
Repayments
Year
Month
Amount repayments due
Group Formation
Groups trained and saving
Target numbers in next generation
Output/Remarks
Year
Month
Groups
Women
Case 4 - 1 (Output)
Planning Number of Groups to be Organized
Repayments
Year
Month
Amount repayments due
Group Formation
Groups trained and saving
Target numbers in next generation
Output/Remarks
Year
Month
Groups
Women
Computation:
On average each woman saves 15 rmb/month times 6 months is 90 rmb.
On average each woman is entitled to a loan of 8 times 90 rmb is 720 rmb 100,000 rmb is available. This is for 100,000 divided by 720 is 139 women
On average groups have 20 members, so 139 divided by 20 is 7 groups have to be organized
Activity 3: Preparations, documentation and procedures for loan applications.
Time :
1.5 hours
Methodology:
Discussion/ Case Analysis/ Task Group work/Lecture
Steps:
Preparations:
Visual Aid M 4 - F - 2;
Form M 4 - F - 1
Group Loan Application (Parts l, 2, 3, 4)
Individual Loan Application
Loan Agreement (with group members)
Township Evaluation Report on Loan Application
Loan Agreement (loans to WG)
Evaluation Report On Loan Applications
Summary: Applications for Approval of Governing Body
Summary: Purpose of Loans
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces the Activity by telling participants that as soon as groups have undergone the Pre-Qualification Workshop in Group Formation and have started to do their monthly savings for 2 to 4 months, the WG can start preparing their Application for the Project Loan.
At the Pre-Qualification Workshop on Group Formation, members would have already developed initial ideas as to the micro-enterprise they would want to undertake. In addition, they would have acquired some basic skills in preparing a Business Plans. But we must realize that what they have acquired are very preliminary skills. They therefore need assistance from Field Workers, especially in:
building up business consciousness and skills in business planning;
getting market information;
arranging for technical training and advisory services;
2. In this Activity, we will focus on the procedures and required documentation for processing of loan applications.
Task Instructions
3. Facilitator uses Visual Aid M 4 - F - 2: Steps: Loan Application and Agreements. Post on the wall.
4. She hands our Forms M 4 - F -1 to 8.
5. Facilitator points out that the Forms should be considered as samples and can be adjusted according to the actual situation and policies of a WG, township or county.
6. It is assumed that the township plays an active role in preparing and processing of loan applications. It is further assumed that they provide assistance to WG in accomplishing these applications. These Forms are meant therefore to clarify and systematize the requirements of the project.
7. Facilitator explains the steps one at a time, as she refers to the pertinent Forms for each step.
Instructions to Facilitator (2)
Facilitator's Notes
8. Facilitator uses the following Notes:
8.1. Step 1: WG Level: Documentation Required for Loan Application
Group Loan Application Part 1
Four lines are available in the payment schedule. This is to make it clear that social development fund is deducted upon release.
If there are any guarantee arrangements, these can be added on this sheet.
Group Loan Application Part 2
The 1: 8 ratio of savings and loan only applies to group loans, not to individual loans. WG may can decide to take turns i using the funds. Some of the members take out loans right after release from Project Management and others are to wait for the first repayments from these loans within the group. . Needless to say, group consensus on such a decision is needed.
Duration of loan to individuals must not be more than 12 months.
Group Loan Application Part 3
For each type of business, a description of the kind of enterprise should be given, e.g. if 12 members are involved in production, the number of members in the second column after Production is 12.
In the first column a further specification then follows, e. g.: sheep raising (3), tobacco growing (7), silk worm raising (2). This listing can be used by both the WG and the Project. Office to determine priorities for technical training, advisory service and other assistance.
Group Loan Application Part 4
The sections which requires information on "Areas for Improvement" in the Application Form, could help the group in identifying areas where they need assistance. It is also useful for the Project Office/ Governing Body in planning inputs and coordinating with relevant bureaux.
Ideas in this form may consist of training needs or other activities or assistance, such as provision of books, drying or storage facilities in the village, etc.
Individual Loan Application
The repayment schedule has many lines, so that payment in installments (e.g. monthly, quarterly) can be registered.
Any guarantee arrangement can be added to this sheet.
Loan Agreement: To WG as Whole
Guarantors can be added as signatories, other agreements can be added.
Most essential in preparing the documentation is that all members participate in the decision-making process.
8.2. Step 2: Township Project Office/ Leading Group Level Processing/Documentation, Approvals/Disapprovals and Follow Through:
The process consist of two phases: (a) the processing and documentation phase which should lead to a decision to approve or disapprove the Loan Applications; (b) follow through with assistance needed. Both phases are equally important.
The Township Project Office/Leading Group has the following responsibilities in processing the loan applications:
Assessment of the loan applications (Tools: Work Sheet 2);
Planning and coordination of needed assistance;
Preparation of required documentation;
Timely submission of the required documentation to the county project office.
Township Project Office Evaluation Process
In general, Field Workers are expected to have been very much involved in the preparations at group level. In such a case, preliminary assessment of the Business Plans would have been done, before the group submits its formal application. At this stage therefore the Field Worker should have no difficulty in accomplishing Work Sheet 2 as well as Part 3 and 4 of the Group Application Form. This part of the documentation helps decision-making at the Township/Leading Group level. This becomes part of the documentation for the Township Evaluation Report.
Documentation submitted to the County Project Office:
Township Evaluation Report on Loan Application Attachments:
(a) Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to WG);
(b) Complete documentation of the WG application.
Facilitator reviews the Township Evaluation Report and the Draft Loan Agreement with the participants. Facilitator emphasizes that the Evaluation Report has three major components:
1. Approval and recommendation of the loan application;
2. Follow Through Technical Assistance
Decisions of Township Leading Group on follow through actions as to the needed assistance for the groups in the implementation of their business plans.
3. Governing Body additional actions
Suggestions for the Governing Body for additional action.
8.3. Step 3: County Project Office/County Governing Body Level Processing/Documentation, Approvals/Disapprovals and Follow Through
The process of Evaluation and approvals/disapprovals at the County level is similar to what was explained previously at township level. In addition, the County level management, takes care of the management of the release of the loan.
The County Project Office has the following responsibilities to support the process of decision-making by the Governing Body:
(a) Verify and assess the loan applications and documentation submitted by the township;
(b) Prepare the documentation for decision-making by the Governing Body;
(c) Timely submission of the required documentation to the County Governing Body
The time needed for verification and assessment of loan applications by the County Project Office will depend on the skills, experience and performance of the Township Project Office and the Township Leading Group.
Documentation submitted to the County Governing Body Form Township Level:
Evaluation Report on Loan Applications
Attachments to the Evaluation Report:
Summary of Applications for Approval Governing Body
Summary of Purpose of Loans
Draft Loan Agreements per group (township)
Township Evaluation Reports .
The Summary of Applications:
This enables the Governing Body to judge whether the applications are in line with the project's policies and procedures for group loans as well as for planning purposes;
The summary of purpose of loans:
This is useful for the Governing Body to plan inputs from the relevant bureaus in assisting the women entrepreneurs and for policy making purposes, e. g. strengthening of relevant bureaus, addressing constraints in certain sectors (e. g. marketing, processing, transportation, facilities required, etc.).
Visual Aid 4-2
Steps: Loan Application and Agreements
Step 1: Preparation by the WG
The first step is the preparation of the loan application by the WG with assistance of the Field Worker. The group prepares the following documentation for submission to the township or county project office:
Group Application Form:
Part 1: Application Summary
Part 2: Allocation of Loans to Members
Part 3: Summary of Purpose of Loans
Part 4: Areas for Improvement
Attachments to Group Application Form:
Individual Application Summary
Individual Business Plans or Basic Information
Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to group members)
Step 2 : Processing/documentation, approvals/disapprovals at Township level and follow through with technical assistance.
Assessment of the loan applications (Tools: Work Sheet 2); Planning and coordination of needed assistance; Preparation of required documentation; Timely submission of the required documentation to the county project office..
Documentation submitted to the County Project Office:
Township Evaluation Report on Loan Application Attachments:
(a) Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to women's groups);
(b) Complete documentation of the WG application.
Summary of Applications for Approval Governing Body
Summary of Purpose of Loans
Draft Loan Agreements per group (township)
Township Evaluation Reports
Step 3: Processing/documentation, approvals/disapprovals and Follow through for Technical Assistance at County Level
Documentation Required for Decision-Making:
Those listed under the section under Township level.
FORM M 4 - F- 1:
GROUP LOAN APPLICATION Part 1
1. Name of Group:___
2. Address:___
3. Number of Members:___
4. Monthly Savings per Member:___
5. Total Savings at date:___
6. Total Amount Group Loan Application:___
(To be used as specified in part 2 of this statement)
7. Payment Schedule
Year/Month
Loan Repayment
Social Development Fund
xxx
xxx
Our group meets the qualifying criteria for project loans to women's groups, because:
- all members have undergone training group formation
- all members have undertaken monthly savings for 6 months
- our group has established a proper book keeping and financial management system
- our group has elected officers with designated officers
- our group conducts monthly meetings and makes decisions democratically
- each applicant has submitted a business plan
- our group has reviewed the loan applications carefully
On behalf of all members, the signatories of this application certify that the above information is true and that the group accepts full liability for repayment of the loan.
Signatories:
Date:___
(Group President)
(Group Treasurer)
(President Loan Committee)
GROUP LOAN APPLICATION Part 2
The total amount of the Group Loan will be disbursed to the members according to the following specification.
Name Member
Amount of Loan (rmb)
Duration of Loan (months)
Monthly Interest (%)
Type of * business
Purpose ** of Loan
* Indicate the type of business: production, processing, trade or service
** Specify the kind of business: pig raising, vegetable production, beancurd processing, trade garmentsd, grocery shop, hair dressing, transportation
Form M 4 - F - 1: Group Loan Application (Part 3)
Summary of Purpose of Loans
Total No. of Members:
Description
No. of members
% of members
Description
No. of members
% of members
Description
No. of members
% of members
Description
No. of members
% of members
Production
Processing
Trade
Services
GROUP LOAN APPLICATION Part 4
Areas for improvement
Our group has identified the following priority areas for improvement (describe what is needed, why it is needed and give suggestions on how it can be arranged: by the group themselves, with assistance from other villagers, the project, bureau, etc.)
Technical skills training:
Technical advisory services:
Market Information:
Entrepreneurial skills:
Other:
Form M 4 - F - 2: INDIVIDUAL LOAN APPLICATION
1. Name of applicant:___
2. Address:___
3. Type of business:___
4. Monthly savings:___
5. Total amount of savings:___
6. Purpose of Loan:___
7. Amount of Loan Application:____
8. Repayment Schedule
Year/Month
Amount Loan Repayment
Amount Interest
I pledge to use the loan in accordance with the attached planning for my business and the principle of self-reliance. I accept full liability for repayment of the loan to the group.
Date:___
Signature:___
Attachments: Complete Business Plan or Basic Plans for Investment, Production, Marketing and Management
Form M 4 - F - 3: LOAN AGREEMENT
(for loans to group members)
The president and treasurer, representing women's group___ (name), hereafter called Party A, and group member___ (name), hereafter called Party B. agree to the following.
1. Party A shall provide a loan in the amount of___ rmb to Party B on (year)___, (month)___ , (day)___.
2. Party B shall use the loan solely for the purpose stated in the Loan Application and its attachment.
3. Party B shall repay the loan with interest according to the schedule below. In case of default a penalty of 10 % per month of delay will be charged.
4. Party B shall submit an Income Statement to Party A after the first production cycle.
5.___ (any other agreements, eg. guarantor, collateral, etc.)
Repayment Schedule
Year/Month
Amount Loan Repayment
Amount Interest
Party A:
Party B:
(Group President)
(Applicant Group Member)
(Group Treasurer)
Date:___
Form M 4 - F- 4: TOWN/SHIP EVALUATION REPORT ON LOAN APPLICATION
1. Assessment of Group Application
(Include comments on group performance, decision making and management skills, commitment, individual skills, type of business, viability of proposed enterprises, contribution to achieving the project goals regarding self-reliance and improved status, etc.)
2. Decisions on Follow Through Assistance
(Based on worksheet 2 and 3, and the Group Application Form Page 3 and 4, list the weaknesses and constraints and the action that will be taken by the township/village to address these limitations. Identify areas which require attention of the Governing Body. The headings below cover the most common needs for assistance.)
 Training needs (technical skills, entrepreneurial skills)
 Technical advisory services
 Marketing and other external constraints
 Other
3. Specification Loan Agreement
(Explain the contents of the Loan Agreement, ea. guarantee arrangements)
Date:___
Signature:___
(Township Governor)
Form M 4 - F - 5: LOAN AGREEMENT
(for loans to WGs)
The County (Township) Governor___ (name), hereafter called Party A, and the president and treasurer representing women's group___ (name) in___ (township, village), hereafter called Party B. agree to the following.
1. Party A shall provide a loan in the amount of___ rmb to Party B on (year)___ ,(month)___ , (day)___
2. Party B shall use the loan solely for loans to its members for the purposes stated in the Group Loan Application and its attachments.
3. Party B shall repay the loan and the contribution to the Social Development Fund according to the schedule below.
4. Party B shall submit the required quarterly reports on its financial status to the project office..
Payment Schedule
Year/Month
Loan Repayment
Social Development Fund
xxx
xxx
Party A:
Party B:
(County or Township Governor)
(Group President)
Date:___
(Group Treasurer)
Annexes:
Form M 4 - F- C: EVALUATION REPORT ON LOAN APPLICATIONS
1. Introduction of proposed approvals
(Refer to planning of number of groups and women to avail of repayments, the attached summaries of applications and purpose of loans to introduce the proposals for approval.)
2. Summary of Township Evaluation Reports
2a. Assessment of Applications and Recommendation for approval
2b. Township commitments for follow through action
2c. Township suggestions for action Governing Body
3. Conclusions and Recommendations
The points listed below can serve as a check list for defining conclusions and recommendations of the report:
 Approval/disapproval and reasons
 Assessment township performance, action needed
 Action plan for training (technical and entrepreneurial skills)
 Action plan for provision of market information
 Recommendations for technical advisory services
 Recommendations for addressing external constraints
 Specific conditions of Loan Agreements
 Other
Date:___
Signature:___
(Head Project Office)
Form M 4 - F - 7: Summary: Applications for Approval of Governing Body
Date training oup formation
Saving
Loan
Name Group
No. of members
First session
Last session
Starting date savings
Recording date total savings
Total amount savings
Total application
Proposed amount for approval
Amount approved
Approval date
Disbursement date
Form M 4 - F - 8: Summary: Purpose of Loans of Individual Applications:
of Individual Applications:___
Description
No. of members
% of members
Description
No. of members
% of members
Description
No. of members
% of members
Description
No. of members
% of members
Production
Processing
Trade
Services
Activity 4: Group financial records
Time:
1 hour
Methodology:
Discussion/ Case Analysis/Task Group Work/Lecture
Steps:
Preparations:
GMF1
Individual Savings Records
GMF2
Individual Loan Record
GF1
Group Savings Record
GF2
Group Loan Record
GF3
Group Repayment Record
GF4
Group Cash Record
GF5
Group Statement of Savings and Loan Operation
Materials:
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by saying that when WG are undertaking savings and loan operations, they need a good financial record keeping system for their fund management. The records are not only important to keep track of the funds, but also to maintain trust among the members. All members have their savings in the group and hence all members should participate in decision-making on the use of the funds. They are the owners of the fund.
2. Facilitator further tells the participants that at the start of the WG operation, they will need assistance from Project Officers in setting up the record system. In this Activity we will therefore discuss the basic records for the WG.
Task Instructions
3. Facilitator then asks participants to list down what kind of information and records are needed. Give 15 minutes for discussion and ask them to present their outputs on newsprint.
Instructions for Facilitator (2)
4. After presentation and discussion of the outputs, Facilitator hands out the a set of the sample of Group Financial Records. Facilitator then writes the list of records below on the black board and checks with participants discussion outputs whether they match with this list.
GROUP FINANCIAL RECORDS
GMF1
Individual Savings Record
GMF2
Individual Loan Record
GF1
Group Savings Record
GF2
Group Loan Record
GF3
Group Repayment Record
GF4
Group Cash Record
GF5
Group Statement Savings and Loans Operations
5. Facilitator then explains the forms one by one, using the points below. Facilitator should be aware that for some participants this is the first time they see these records. Facilitator uses the Forms as she has listed on the blackboard. Explain slowly and clearly, give examples, and check from time to time whether participants understand.
Notes for Facilitator
GMF1: Individual Savings Record
Each member has a record like this, as evidence of her savings in the group. After depositing her monthly savings the treasurer signs on this as a receipt or record.
GMF2: Individual Loan Record
This record contains all the details about loans. Both the group accountant and the member have this record, so that no misunderstanding can occur on the conditions of the loan. See the attached Sample GMF2 for an example on how to fill in this record. Note that these forms are countersigned. After each payment, the accountant signs the member's record as the member's evidence that she has paid. The member signs the accountant's record to certify that her payment is recorded properly by the accountant.
GF1: Group Savings Record
From the group savings record the members of the group, at all times knows exactly how much the total savings is. It also is a tool to review the members' performance in that it shows clearly whether the pledged amount has been deposited on time. It is advisable for Groups to post this record in their Activity Room as a reminder of their progress. All members have a right to know the group's financial status and members can check whether their deposits have been recorded properly.
GF2: Group Loan Record
Transparency of decision-making on loans to members is important to maintain trust among the members. This record therefore should be public for review by the members at all times, e.g. by posting it on the wall in the Activity Room. This form can be the basis for Project Officers to discuss the groups policies, such as duration of loans, amount of loans and interest rate. It also can be used for planning of technical skills training and advisory services for the group.
GF3: Group Repayment Record
The group accountant needs to keep track of timely repayment of loans. In addition to GMF2: the Individual Loan Record, she makes a monthly summary of the payments due and the actual performance. Note that this is a rather complicated record. Give participants time to study the attached Sample on how to fill in this record. In every meeting this record should be presented for each month including overdue balance.
GF4: Group Income and Expenditure Record
By keeping an Income and Expenditure Record, the treasurer will always know exactly how much cash is available. The sum total of the Cash Balance plus the Balance on the Group's Bank Account should be the amount of money which the group has available for loans to members. In the monthly meeting the treasurer reports.
GF5: Group Statement Savings and Loans Operations
The Group Statement of Savings and Loan Operations summarizes the performance of the group as recorded in the previous Group Financial Records. Groups should discuss this. this is submitted quarterly to the County Project Office through the township officer. This Statement facilitates timely detection of problems by the Field Worker, such as low savings discipline, little activity in loans, bad repayment performance, etc. Action can then be taken in a timely manner.
6. Facilitator ends the Activity by saying that the records which we have just and analyzed are samples which can be used to assist WG Finance Officers in setting up their own system. If they prefer another format, they can adjust.
GMF1 Individual Savings Records
(Part 1 Member's Passbook)
Name:___
Date
Amount Deposit
Cumulative Balance
Signature Group Treasurer
Group Seal
Note 1: Each member holds this record as evidence of her savings in the group
Note 2: The group treasurer signs after each deposit.
GMF2: Individual Loan Record
(Part 2 Member's Passbook)
Name:___
Total Number of Loans from dart d group until starting date of this record:___
Total Amount d Loans from start of group until starting date d this record:___
Repayment schedule
Repayment Performance
Loan no
Purpose Loan
Date Loan
Amount of Loan
Installment No
Date
Amount
Amount Interest
Date
Amount
Amount Interest
Amount Penalty
Balance Over due
Checking Date
Signature
Note 1: Both the member and the group accountant keep this record
Note 2: Both records are to be countersigned. meaning that the member signs the accountant's copy, and the accountant signs the member's copy
GF1: Group Savings Record
Name Group:___
Name Member
Total savings at* beginning this year
Year: Month
Total savings this year
Total savings since stars group
Signature Treasurer
Total
* Total savings at the beginning of this year is the total savings from the start of the group until the beginning of this record Note that this is the Cumulative Balance of the Individual Savings Record
GF2 Group Loan Record
Name group:___
Total Number of Loans members from start of group until starting date of this record:___
Total Amount of Loans to members from start of the group until starting date of this record:___
Date
Loan No*
Name Member
Purpose Loan
Amount Loan
Duration Loan (months)
Monthly Interest (%)
Remarks
Code**
Description
* For example, if until now 21 hens have been granted to members, start on this record with number 22
** Codes for purpose of loan:
1 = production type of enterprise
description e.g.: silk worm raising, sheep raising, cotton planting, vegetable growing
2 = processing type of enterprise
description e.g.: mat weaving, starch or oil processing, bakery
3 = trading type of enterprise
description e.g.: buy/sell walnuts, buy/sell garments
4 = service type of enterprise
description e.g.: restaurant hairdressing, transportation, dancing hall
GF3: Group Repayment Record
Name Group:___
For repayments due in Month:___
Payments due in this month
Payments made
Name Member
Installment No
Day
Amount
Amount Interest
Date
Amount
Amount Interest
Amount Penalty
Balance Over due
Remarks (reason default, action taken)
Total
Note 1: The accountant uses GMF1 (Individual Loan Record) to up-date this record monthly
Note 2: The accountant reports about the repayment performance in the monthly meetings
GF4 Group Cash Record
Name Group:___
Beginning Balance (Cash Status)
Amount:
Cash In
Cash Out
Remaining Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Amount
Date
The Remaining Balance shows how much cash is available for loans to members
GF5 Group Statement of Savings and Loan Operation
(for submission to county project office)
Name Group:___
Signature Group Treasurer:___
Number of members: ___
Signature Group Accountant: ___
Date Statement: ___
Signature Group Auditor: ___
Period Statement (quarterly): month___ to month _
Item
Status at beginning of statement period
Status at end of statement period
Change
Explanation
1. Remaining Balance RF Loan
2. Average Savings/member/month
3. Total Savings
4. Total Number of Loans to Members
5. Total Amount of Loans to Members
6. Total Balance Overdue of Loans
7. Cash Balance
8. Balance Bank Account
Explanation:
Use Group Savings Record (GF1) for Item 3:
Average Savings per member per month
Total Savings
Use Group Loan Record (GF2) for Item 4 and 5:
Total Number of Loans to Members
Total Amount of Loans to Members
Use Group Repayment Record (GF3) for Item 6:
Total Balance Overdue
Use Group Cash Record (GF4) for Item 7:
Cash Balance
Topic 2: Developing the county work plan
Activity 1: Developing the county work plan
Time:
1.5 hours
Methodology:
Group Work with assistance from Staff
Steps:
Preparations:
One set of FORM M 4 - F - WP for each participating County.
Task Instructions
1. Facilitator instructs participants as follows:
(a) We will distribute a set of Forms for you to use to accomplish your County Work Plan;
(b) Note that the set of Forms has some sample entries in them. These are examples.
(c) Remember what you have learned from the previous Topic;
(d) You are given 45 minutes to draft your Work Plan;
(e) After 45 minutes, each County will present their Work Plan as follows:
We form ourselves into 4 sub-groups, A, B. C, D.
Group A and B will present to each other.
Groups C and D to each other.
(f) We should give each other comments and suggestions.
(g) The Staff will be available and will make their own comments and suggestions.
Instructions For Facilitator
At the end of the presentations, Facilitator asks participants to submit their final Work Plan to the workshop staff for final comments. She gives them a specific deadline for submission. She reminds them that this Work Plan will need to be discussed with the County WPD Project Manager.
Facilitator thanks the participants for working very hard.
Form M 4 - F- WP: Six Month Country Work Plan
(Group Formation Component)
From:___
To:___
(month/year)
(month/year)
Name of County:___
Number of Villages Covered:___
Dab Prepared:
Number of WG:___
Number of Field Workers to be Trained:___
Estimated No. of Women:___
Activities
Place
No. of Days
Year
Responsible Persons
Support Persons
Output
1. Preparation of Materials and other administrative requirements
2. Identification/Designation of Additional Country and Township Personnel
3. Workshop on Formation of WGs:
A Theoretical Phase
B. Practicum Phase
II. Formation of Women's Groups
- Village 1:
-Village 2:
- Village 3:
- Village 4:
- Village 5:
Etc
5. Group Pays 4% (SDF) Social Development Fee(amount:___ for year 1)
6. County Releases Group Loan from Project Revelving Fund
7. Group Officers (Loans Committee) release Individual Loans
8. Individuals Pay 4% SDF for County and 1% for Group
III. MCH/FP Activities
1. Assess equipment/supply needs etc of Village Stations Clinic
2. Make Proposal to County for Funding from County SDF
3. Village Station Clinic Operational for Members of Group and Others in Village
4. Yearly Medical Check Up for Women and Children
5. Quarterly MCH/FP Education
6. Organized provision of MCH/FP Services/Referrals (UD insertion; pills etc)
- Services in Village
- Referrals to Township or County Hospitals
7. Organize Group Child Care on Kindergarten Facilities
(B) WG MCH/FP Activities
1. Assist WG in Determining Village Station Clinic Needs for Operation and Preparation of WG Proposal to County for Funding from County SDF
2. Assist WG planing and implementation of Yearly Medical Check Up
3. Assist WG in Planing and Implementation of Quarterly MCH/FP Education; Provision of Services
4. Facilitate Referrals to Township on County Hospitals
5. Assist WG in Planning and Implementation of Organized Child Care on Kindergarten Facilities
(C) WG Functional Literacy Activities
Assist WG in planning and implementation of functional literacy activities for WG and Village::
1. Oversee Planning
2. Check Examination Process/Result
3. Check members helping students
(D) WG Folk Media Activities
Assist WG in planing and implementation of WG Folk Media Activities:
1. Oversee Plans
2. Check messages for presentation
(E) WG Other Activities
1. Oversee Plans
2 Assist WG with village leaders and other leaders
(F) WG Meetings
Assist WG in starting and maintaining the standard set at the Workshop
- Village 1:
- Village 2:
- Village 3:
Etc
Note: Field Workers need to assist in at least the first 3 monthy meetings of WGs.
IV. County-Level Activities
1. Survey of Social Needs as basis for use of SDF (Form:)
2. SDF Proposals Submitted to County Governing Body
3. Set-up Records System
4. Reports:
(A) Gather Data From Groupe/Townships
(B) Submit Report to Governing Body
(Quarterly) - Group Financial Status of Capital Fund and Project Revolving Fund
(Quarterly) - Activities
(C) Submit Report to DOFTEC
(Monthly) - Financial (Form:___)
(Yearly) - Activities (Form:___)
<section>9</section>
Module 4 - W: Women's group (WG) action plan and wrap-up and closing ceremony
Topic 1: Development of the WG action plan
Activity 1: Preparations in the development of the WG action plan
Topic 1: Development of the WG action plan
Activity 2: Development of the WG action plan
Topic 2: Workshop wrap-up and closing
Module 4 - W: Women's group (WG) action plan and wrap-up and closing ceremony
MODULE 4 - W: WOMEN'S GROUP (WG) ACTION PLAN AND WRAP-UP AND CLOSING CEREMONY
VISUAL AIDS AND FORMS
Visual Aid: M4-1
Organizational Development Framework
WU- 1
Programme Overview
WU- 2
Programme Components
Form: M 4 - 1
WG Action Plan
MODULE 4-W: WOMEN'S GROUP (WG) ACTION PLAn AND WRAP- UP AND CLOSING CEREMONY
BACKGROUND/RATIONALE
The Women's Group (WG) Action Plan consolidates all the agreed to Goals and Objectives the group has arrived at. The attitudes, knowledge and skills the women have acquired during this workshop are the underlying foundation. The Action Plan is a concrete and practical step within a given time span to put into motion the actions needed to achieve the goals and objectives the women have arrived at during the workshop. The Group Action Plan is therefore a basis for the Women's Groups to direct their activities in a concrete step by step way right after they leave the workshop. This is therefore not only a learning exercise but a commitment to achieve the goals and objectives the have set for themselves. It is also therefore a basis for assessing their own performance as well as a measure of compliance of the Terms and Conditions they have accepted from Project Management.
The Wrap-Up and Closing Ceremony are important parts of this workshop. These are opportunities for participants to once more take another step to consolidate their gains in self-reliance, as they articulate their feelings about their experiences and what they have learned in this workshop.
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES
By the end of 6 - 7 hours, participants will have:
1. Their Group Action Plan which they would have committed to;
2. Their Organizational Framework which they would have committed to;
3. Participated in a meaningful closing of the workshop;
4. Basic workshop document outputs essential to their organizational functioning.
TOPICS
There are 2 Topics in this Module. These are: Topic 1: Development of the WG Action Plan and Topic 2: Wrap-Up and Closing Ceremonies.
Topic 1: Development of the WG action plan
Activity 1: Preparations in the development of the WG action plan
Time
1. 5 hours
Methodology
Discussion/ Group work/Lecture
Steps
Option
Facilitator should gauge the interest, energy and concentration of the group. If she thinks this Activity should be broken into two Activities, she should do so. For example, she may wish to have a separate activity for the "Organizational Development Framework".
1. Preparation:
Visual Aids and Forms:
Module 1 (posted on the wolf ahead of time)
M1- 9 and 9 -A: Roots, Indications, Consequences of Women's Low Status
M1- 10 and 10-A : Approaches In Raising Women's Status
M 1 - 18: Synthesis of Module I
Module 2 (posted on the wall ahead of time)
M 2 - 8: Group Lending Procedures
A! 2 - 9: Terms and Conditions of the Croup Project Loan
M2 -10: Terms and Conditions of Individual Project Loan
M 2 - 15: Group Goal, Principle and Spirit
M 2 - 17: Group Objectives
M2 -18 or 19: Organizational Structure (as chosen by the group)
M2 - 27: WG Standard Agenda
M2 - 28: Synthesis for Module 2 (marker)
Module 3 (dully filled out be participants during the workshop):
M3 - 1: Marketing Aspects of My Business Plan
2: Production Plan
3: Investment Plan
4: Net Cash Income
Module 4
M`- 1: Organizational Framework for Women* Groups
Form Aid - 1: Action Plan Format
Materials
marker pees; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator - Review of Perspective and Goals and Objectives (1)
2. Facilitator introduces this Activity by explaining the need of an Action Plan and what it means, by emphasizing the following: (a) right after the workshop the WG will take concrete steps on-matters which they have committed themselves to do in this workshop (b) that since they committed themselves individually and as a group, they would need to agree how they will do this. The Action Plan is a step by step and systematic way of going about these individual and group commitments.
3. Facilitator continues and says that in order to refresh our minds about what we learned and what we have committed ourselves to we review:
Root, Indications and consequences of Women's Low Status
Approaches in Raising Women's Status
4. Facilitator continues and reviews what they participants have already developed.
Goals, Spirit and motto
Objectives
5. This is done slowly by asking questions once in a while whether the group truly (a) understand what they have committed themselves to and (b) whether they still want to make changes. Facilitator emphasizes that the OBJECTIVES are the basis for the details of the WG ACTION PLAN.
Emphasize the various components of the Objectives;
The first essential step right after the workshop is to start the savings mobilization process.
Instructions for Facilitator-Group Savings and Loan and the Project Revolving Fund (2)
6. Facilitator continues and reviews the following:
6.1. Group Lending Procedures
6.2. Terms and Conditions of Group Project Loan
6.3. Terms and Conditions of the Individual Project Loan
In the process of the review, Facilitator revalidates participant understanding on these, and further clarifies if there are misconceptions or misunderstandings.
Instructions for Facilitator - WG Micro-Enterprise Activities (3)
7. Facilitator focuses on the fact that at the end of Module 3, individuals have been able to develop various aspects of their individual Business plans. She tells them that some time after the workshop, the Loans Committee with the help of the Field Workers from the project office, will help their finalize their Application for the Project Revolving Fund.
Instructions for Facilitator - Organization Functioning of the WG (4)
8. Facilitator emphasizes the importance of monthly meetings for each woman to (a) continue to deepen what we have learned in this workshop; (b) to learn from one another; (c) to gain strength from one another to continue our commitments to ourselves and others; (d) to deposit our monthly savings; (e) know things on how our funds are being manage; (f) etc. She emphasizes the need to be systematic in the way the run their meetings and refers to Visual Aid M 2 - 27 WG Standard Agenda.
Instructions for Facilitator - Organizational Development Framework (ODF) (5)
9. Visual Aid M 4 - 1 contains a SAMPLE ODF. Note that this is related to the Objectives which the group has already developed. The Objectives are short term in perspectives. The ODF gives the women a longer term view of what they want to achieve. These are targets of what they would like to achieve in strengthening their organization.
Task Instructions - Organizational Development Framework (ODF)
10. Participants are formed into 3 groups. Their task is to review this SAMPLE ODF and adjust this to their own estimate of their own targets against various indicators. They are given 15 minutes to do this. Then a member in each group, reports to the larger group: The larger group should have a consensus as to the GROUP COMMITMENT ON THIS ODF.
11. Facilitator ends this session by saying that now we are ready to develop our Group Action Plan since we have thoroughly considered important elements to do this.
Visual Aid M 41:
ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK FOR WOMEN'S GROUPS
COMPONENT
LEVEL I FORMATION
LEVEL II CONSOLIDATION
LEVEL III INSTITUTIONALIZATION
DURATION
3-6 MONTHS
1 YEAR
1-2 YEARS
Group Management
- Clear goals and objectives
- Clear goals and objectives
- Clear goals and objectives
- functioning officers/members (90%/80%)
- Functioning officers/members(90%/80%)
- Functioning officers/members (100%/95%)
- One meeting per month
- One meeting per month
- 24 meetings in a year
- Minutes of Meetings
- Minutes of Meetings
- Minutes of Meetings
- Attendance at meeting (90%)
- Attendance e at meeting (95%)
- Attendance at meeting (100%)
- Membership -25 individuals
- Membership - 30 individuals
- Membership - 40 individuals
- Presence policies and procedures for 6 mo
- Updated policies and procedure
- Revised/improved policies
- Action plan
- Updated Action plan
- Updated Action plan
- Records system
- Quality record system
- Quality record system
Savings Mobilization and Credit system
- Presence of a written savings and credit policies and procedures
- Updated savings and credit policies and procedure
- Revised/Improved savings and credit policies and procedures
- Weekly or monthly savings (as agreed)
- Continue monthly savings
- Increase the savings among members
- 100% of members are savings
- 100% of members are savings
- 100% of members are savings
- Presence of a simple records system
- Have a good and accurate financial reports
- Complete financial and record system
- 100% credit repayment rate
-10.0% credit repayment rate
-100% credit repayment rate
- Have a bank book
- Increase on bank book in a small amount
- Increase on bank book in large amount
Enterprise Development
- Trained members with knowledge and skills enterprise management, finance marketing, e
- 100% of members undertaking two kinds of enterprise or business or expand business
-100% of members undertaking enterprise or business; Expanded business
- Individuals undertaking enterprise or busine
- WG increase the credit loan and benefit fro
- WG increase the credit loan for members
- At least 70% of members increase income o 20% - 40%
- At least 80% of members increase income of 40%
- Some members can keep records
-100% d members do record keeping
-100% credit repayment rate
-100% repayment
- Bank ban, one time per month
Family Life Planning
- 80% of women trained in reproductive health related matters
- 90% of women trainee in reproductive health related matters
- 100% of women trained in reproductive health related matters
- 20% of members have written commitment to have two children only
- 40% of members have written commitment to have two children only
- 60% of members have written commitment to have two children only
- Village station clinic functioning for members and whole village
- Village station clinic functioning
- Village station clinic functioning
- 80% of member's children go to school
- 90% of member's children go to school
- Yearly check up for mothers and children
- Motive another member of family
- Trained most of family on another village
- Increase 30% on welfare fund
- 30% of children in kindergarten
- 40%-50% of children in kindergarten
- 50%-60% of children in kindergarten
- 80% of children in primary school
- 80% of children in primary school
- 90% of children in primary school
- 65% of children in middle school
- 70% of children in middle school
- 80% of children in middle school
- 50% girl child in school
- 70% girl child in school
-100% girl child in school
Functional Literacy
- Classroom designated for functional literacy
- 90% of members attend the classes
- 100% of illiterates attend the classes
- 80% of illiterates attend the classes
- 50% or members get a qualified certificate
- 85% of members get a qualifying certificate
- Organized members helping illiterates
- Organized members helping illiterates
- Organized members helping illiterates
Folk Media
- WG organize 2 folk media performance in a year
- WG organize 4 folk media performance in a year
- WG organize 8 folk media performances in a year
- There is 400 audience
- There is 800 audience
- There is 1500 audience
- Build a performance team in project villa
- Performance by themselves
- Have performance in the village
- Have performance in another village
- Women status messages incorporated
- Women status messages incorporated
- Women status messages incorporated
Activity Center
- Have activity center for members
- Have activity center for members and others invited
- Have activity center for members and others invited
Other village Development Activities
- 1 project for the village
- 2-3 projects for the village
- 45 projects for the village
Topic 1: Development of the WG action plan
Activity 2: Development of the WG action plan
Time
2 hours
Methodology
Discussion/ group work/lecture
Steps
Preparation:
Form M 4 - 1: Action Plan for Women's Groups (format)
Material
marker pens; newsprint
Instructions for Facilitator (1)
1. Facilitator introduces this Activity by saying that we are now going to develop our WG Action Plan. She encourages the participants by saying that this should not be too difficult, since we spent time in making the necessary preparations in the last Activity.
Task Instructions
2. Facilitator distributes Form M 4 - 1: Action Plan for Women's Groups. She tells the participants that this form has sample entries in them. This is mean to help participants to accomplish their WG Action Plans easier. The following are important points for participants to consider or refer to in the process of accomplishing the WG Action Plan:
(a) Refer to the Group Objectives. You will note that the activities in the Action Plan format contain activities which are necessary to achievement the objectives the WG set for themselves;
(b) What the participants need to do is to discuss and decide on the needed information to fill in the blank spaces in the format;
(c) Participants must not just fill in information, just to finish this Activity. They must realize that what they put in this Action Plan are commitments to themselves and to Project Management.
5. Facilitator forms sub-groups of 5 - 7 women for group discussion. If participants come from different villages, then the grouping should be by village groups. They are given 20 minutes for this phase of the work.
6. Sub-groups present their Action Plans. WG officers, with guidance from the workshop staff review outputs.
7. Results are consolidated by the WG Officers. Facilitator guides the consolidation of subgroup outputs into one Action Plan for the Group.
8. This session ends with he president of the WG presenting their WG Action Plan (as consolidated) to the group and Project Management.
Form M4 1: Action Plan For Women's Groups
First 6 Months: (month) (year)
Name d Village:___
Date Action Plan Prepared___
Name of Group:___
(Date, Month. Year)
Number of Women in Group:___
Date Next Action Plan to be Ready:
(Date, Month. Year)
Activities
Place
No. of Days
Year
Responsible Persons
Support Persons
Output
I. Group Capital Building Up (Savings Mobilization Utilization)
1. Group Savings (amount per person: Y)___
2. Group Loaning (Interest per month:___ %)
II. Individual Business Plans
(Funding From Project Revolving Fund)
1. Individual Business Plans screened by Loans Committee
2. Loans Committee Endorse to County Governing Body
3. County Governing Body Approves Individual Business Plan
4. County Governing Body Signs Contract With Groups Officers for Group loan
III. Technical Assistance for and Supervision of
(A) Group Capital Fund and Project Revolving Fund
1 Assist Group Officer and Members to Set-up System (procedures and records ) for Managing Group Capital Fund
2 Assist Loans Committee to Finalize Group Loan from Project Revolving Fund
3 Assist WG Officers to Obtain Approval for WG Group Loan from Project Revolving Fund
4 Assist WG Officers in Signing Contact for Group Loan
5 Facilitate Release of Group Loans and Payment of SDF:
-Village 1:
- Village 2:
- Village 3:
- Village 4:
- Village 5:
Etc
6. Assist WG in Release of Individual Loans and Payment of SDF:
-Village 1:
- Village 2:
- Village 3:
- Village 4:
- Village 5:
Etc
7. Assist WG to Set-up their Procedures and Records in Managing:
- Group Capital Fund
- Project Revolving Fund Loan
IV. Functional Literacy Activities
1. Identification of potential students
2. Determination of groups by competence level
3. Assignment of members to help students in homework
4. Classes start
5. Examination to pass from one level to another
V. Regular Monthly Group Meetings
1. Agenda determined
2. group meeting
3. Minutes ready
VI. Folk Media Activities
1. Occasions for Folk Media Presentations
2. Members Discuss/Plan
3. Members Determine Messages and type of presentation (song, skit etc)
VII. WG Activity Room
1. Identified
2. Functioning
VIII. Other Development Activities
For Group
Etc
For Village
Etc
Code:
(1) Place:
WA = Women's Activity Room
VSC = Village Station Clinic
VSR = Village School Room
VG = Village in General
OV = 0utside Village
(2) Responsible/Support Persons:
P =President
VP = Vice President
S = Secretary
T = Treasurer
LC = Loans Committee
MCW/FP = MCH/FP Committee
FL = Functional Literacy
FM = Folk Media Committee
M = Members
Topic 2: Workshop wrap-up and closing
Activity 1 and 2: Workshop Wrap Up and Closing Ceremony
The Wrap-Up and Closing Ceremony could be taken as one continuous Activity or it could be split info two Activities, as the situation demands. About I hour would be needed for the Wrap-Up and another hour for the Closing Ceremony. Another possibility is to have the Wrap-up and the Reflection of Participants and Workshop Staff as one activity and a more Traditional Closing Ceremony could be held. The Workshop Staff therefore has to use their judgment and good taste in this matter.
1. WORKSHOP WRAP-UP
The wrap-up of the workshop has actually begun with Topic I in this Module. What needs to be done et this stage is simply to give participants some "makers" about what they have learned and what they have committed themselves to. (Markers are visual or non-visual synthetic presentations, which capture the substance of what one wants to remember). The Facilitator in dialogue with the participants would have done much of this already. The Facilitator simply underlines key points at this stage.
The following Visual Aids/Form are to be used for the wrap-up session:
Visual Aid WU - 1:
Programme Overview
WU - 2:
Programme Components
M 1 - 9:
Roots, Indications , Consequences of Women's Low Status
M 1 - 9 - A:
Broken Jar
M I - 10:
Approaches in Raising Women's Status
M I -10 - A:
Whole Jar
M 2 -15:
Group Goals, Spirit and Motto
M 2 -17:
Objectives
M 4 - 1:
Organizational Development Framework
Form M4- 1:
WG ACTION PLAN (es output)
2. CLOSING CEREMONIES
The Closing Ceremonies should have the following elements: (a) an opportunity for the participants to have their own personal reflections which they share with the group; (b) the workshop staff's own reflection which they also share with the group; (c) a validation by leaders of the outputs of the group and the acceptance of the commitments of the WG as written into the WG ACTION PLAN.
The format and the details of the Ceremony is left to the imagination of the group and the workshop staff.
Reflection
This is a very important part of the workshop. This must nod be rushed or replaced by any other activity.
Suggested Guide Questions:
(a) Guide Questions for Reflection of Participants
What has been the most significant lessons or insights I have gained in this workshop?
What would be most difficult for me to accomplish among what I have committed to, in the Group Action Plan and why?
(b) Guide Questions for Workshop Staff
What are the 2 - 3 most significant lessons I learned from the participants?
What difficulties do I foresee to be able to help the WG with their Activities in the Action Plan?
Participants should be able to express their own thoughts and feelings about their experience in this workshop. They should therefore be given sufficient time so that as many as possible are able to participate in this particular Activity.
The Ceremony Setting
Facilitator and participants should use their imagination to make this Ceremony a memorable experience. Make it simple but beautiful. Provide a simple and tasteful environment for the occasion, such as having flowers (fresh or paper); candles etc. Graduation certificates could be given. Awards could also be given. For example for those who had difficulty in participating, but improved significantly, and other similar categories.
The Closing Ceremony therefore should be another opportunity for the women to reinforce their sense of confidence and a time to consolidate the gains they have attained self-reliance in this workshop.
This serves as the Evaluation of the whole Workshop.
It would be most helpful if officials are present. However, if these officials cannot be available for the whole period, it is suggested that we hold 2 closing Ceremonies. One as suggested above, which could be held at night. Another one, which is the traditional way, could be held the morning after.
3. Workshop Materials WG
By way of a minimum, all Visual Aids and Forms used in Module 4 - W should be given to the WG Officers so that they could used these in the WG Activity Center which the WG will eventually have. Other Visual Aids and Forms which the participants wish to have should be given to them, including their outputs in this workshop.
In some previous workshops, the turn over of these materials was made part of the Closing Ceremonies to signify a recognition of the hard work of the participants and the workshop staff's sense of pride in sharing the success of this workshop with the participants.
WOMEN POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT (WPD)
PROGRAMME OVERVIEW
ROOT CAUSES OF WOMEN'S LOW STATUS
AREAS WHERE CHANGES ARE NEEDED
WHAT PARTICIPATION IN WHAT GROUP BUILDING CAN DO FOR ME AND THE GROUP
- Culture of dependence, especially on self esteem
PERSONAL VALUE CHANGE
- Help me overcome my weaknesses
- Traditional thinking
- Improve my skills
- Unplanned child births
- Raise funds through savings mobilization
- Lack of skills in
- Group control of key factors for self and group development, especially in resources mobilization
- technology
- business
- literacy
- Low creativity
DECISION TO PARTICIPATE IN BUILDING A VITAL ORGANIZATION WHICH MEETS MY VITAL NEEDS
- Mutual support and assistance in both economic and social spheres
- Lack of vital organization
- Systematic effort to achieve personal and group goals and objectives
- Gain experience in various fields
Note: As gathered from groups in China
- Expand my world view
WOMEN POPULATION A ND DEVELOPMENT (WPD)
PROGRAMME OVERVIEW
IMMEDIATE RESULT AREAS
LONG TERM IMPACT
- Conviction - ability to improve self and business
- Proven to myself that I have potentials perhaps I did not believe I have, which results in a higher appreciation of myself
- Mutual assistance in mobilizing financial assistance for group use, disciple and a culture of saving for business
- A new and baker regard from my family members and the community in general
- Initiate/expand my micro-enterprise
- Greater participation in decision-making in the family-community; communicate are my interest
- More personally satisfying use of my time for production/business purposes, group activities, self
- Increase in my contribution to household income
- Greater control of my own life and its various aspects
- Increased skills in business, technology, managing myself in organization, literacy and numeracy skills
- Continuous process of gaining skills in:
- Increased confidence in taking higher and necessary risks in business
- managing self in organization
- I participate vitally in decision-making in the family in important matters, such as the future of the children
- business
- Able to help others to achieve their own goals and objectives
- technology
- Start of having a longer life planning vision as regards number of children; their education, etc.
- literacy and numeracy
- I contribute to expanding other economic activities in my village, as I engage in business (the more activities the more other services will be required)
- time management at home and business
- My health and that of my family are cared for better
- household financial management
- Participate in social life
- time for self and entertainment
- Role model for younger generation
- More energy and attention to my own health and that of the family
- More social contacts
WPD PROGRAMME COMPONENTS
<title>Breaking through - A manual for field workers and rural women on group formation</title>
Evaluation tools in-depth questionnaires
Evaluation tools in-depth questionnaires
MODULE 1: WORKSHOP EVALUATION
THE ROLE OF PERSONS IN ORGANIZATION BUILDING
NAME:___
DATE:___
This workshop was designed to meet your expectations and objectives. It is important for the workshop staff to know if you are satisfied. They would also like to get suggestions on how to improve the workshop. Please feel free to give your opinion about the following questions:
I. Usefulness of the Topics and Activities
Instructions
Please rate the degree to which you think the sessions were useful for your personal life and for your group. Encircle the number that best describes your perception.
not useful (if you have not learned anything or if you think it has no practical use)
little use
useful
very useful
TOPIC/ACTIVITY
PERSONAL
GROUP
Topic 1: Setting A Tone For Participation
Activity 1: Self Introduction
Activity 2: Expectation Setting
Activity 3: The Workshop Method
Topic 2: Situation Analysis
Activity 1 My Village Today
Activity 2: My Village Five From Now
Topic 3: Why Organize Ourselves
Activity: Why Organize Ourselves
Topic 4: The Importance of Each Person
Activity 1: Appreciating Self and Others
Activity 2: Communication
Activity 3: Cooperation
Activity 4: Trust
Topic 5: Synthesis Module I
II. Your Thoughts About Certain Aspects of the Workshop
Mention one feature of the workshop that was of most value to you. How do you intend to use it?
III. About Workshop Arrangements
Please rate the degree to which you are satisfied with the arrangements of the workshop .
Encircle the number which best describes your opinion.
1 = Not satisfied
2 = Not completely satisfied
3 = Completely satisfied
Please write down under "remarks" why you are not satisfied; or not completely satisfied.
Arrangement/Attitude
Degree satisfaction
Remark
Work room /facilities
Seating arrangement
Time schedule
Clarity of objectives
Logic of topic sequence
Variation of workshop methodology
Pace of training
Frequency of recaps
Does Facilitator:
Talk too much
Talk too little
Group participation:
Actively participate
Come on time
IV. What are your suggestions to the participants and the facilitator to further improve the workshop activities?
1. For Participants:
2. For Facilitator:
3. For Monitors:
MODULE 2: WORKSHOP EVALUATION
ORGANIZATIONAL MECHANICS
NAME:___
DATE:___
This workshop was designed to meet your expectations and objectives. It is important for the workshop staff to know if you are satisfied. They would also like get suggestions on how to improve the workshop. Please feel free to give your opinion about the following questions:
I. Usefulness of Topics and Activities
Instructions
Please rate the degree to which you think the sessions are useful for your personal life and for your group. Encircle the number that best describes your perception.
1 = not useful (if you have not learned anything or if you think it has no practical use)
2 = little use
3= useful
4 = very useful
TOPIC/ACTIVITY
PERSONAL
GROUP
Topic 1: Group Capital Fund and the Project Revolving Fund
Activity 1: Concepts of Savings
Activity 2: Mutual Assistance Through Savings/Loan
Activity 3: Determining Our Savings Capacity
Activity 4: Group Policies and Procedures
Activity 5: Group Capital Fund and the Project Revolving Fund
Topic 2: Basic Elements of a Functioning Organization
Activity 1: Goal Setting
Activity 2: Objective Setting
Activity 3: Leadership Styles
Activity 4: Group Organizational Structure
Activity 5: Duties and Responsibilities of Officers
Activity 6: Group Decision-Making
Activity 7: WG Policies and Procedures
Activity 8: WG Group Meeting
Topic 3: Synthesis of Module 2
II. Your Thoughts About Certain Aspects of the Workshop
Mention one feature of the workshop that was of most value to you. How do you intend to use it?
III. About Workshop Arrangements
Please rate the degree to which you are satisfied with the arrangements of the workshop.
Encircle the number which best describes your opinion.
1 = Not satisfied
2 = Not completely satisfied
3 = Completely satisfied
Please write down under remarks why you are not satisfied or not completely satisfied.
Arrangement/Attitude
Degree satisfaction
Remark
1. General arrangements
Workshop room/facilities
Seating arrangement
Time schedule
Clarity of objectives
Logic of topic sequence
Variation of workshop methodology
Pace of workshop
Frequency of recaps
2. Does the Facilitator:
Make you feel at ease
Talk too much or too little
Appreciate your contribution
3. Do the participants:
Actively participate
Come on time
IV. Suggestions for Improvements
What are your suggestions to the participants and the facilitator to further improve the workshop activities?
1. Participants:
2. Facilitator:
3. Monitors:
MODULE 3: WORKSHOP EVALUATION
BASIC ELEMENTS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF MICRO-ENTERPRISES
NAME:___
DATE:___
This workshop was designed to meet your expectations and objectives. It is important for the facilitator to know if you are satisfied. They would also like to get suggestions on how to improve the workshop. Please feel free to give your opinion about the following questions:
I. Usefulness of Topics and Activities
Instructions
Please rate the degree to which you think the sessions were useful for your persona! life and
for your group. Encircle the number that best describes your perception.
not useful (if you have not learned anything or if you think it has no practical use.
little we
useful
very useful
TOPIC/ACTIVITY
PERSONAL
GROUP
Topic 1: Causes of Success or Failure of a Business
Activity 1: Lin's Cabbage Garden
Activity 2: Chu's Cabbage Garden
Topic 2: My Business Plan
Activity 1: My Proposed Business Plan
Activity 2: My Marketing Plan
Activity 3: My Production Plan
Activity 4: My Management Plan
Activity 5: My Investment Plan
Activity 6: My Projected Net Cash Income I
Topic 3: Important Business Records
Activity 1: My Cash Record
Topic 4: Synthesis of Module 3
II. Your thoughts About certain Aspects of the Workshop
Mention one feature of the workshop that was of most value to you. How do you intend to use it?
III. About Workshop Arrangements
Please rate the degree to which you are satisfied with the arrangements of the workshop.
Instructions
Encircle the number which best describes your opinion.
1 Not satisfied
2 Not completely satisfied
3 Completely satisfied
Arrangement/Attitude
Degree satisfaction
Remark
1. General arrangements
Workshop room/facilities
Seating arrangement
Time schedule
Clarity of objectives
Logic of topic sequence
Variation of workshop methodology
Pace of workshop
Frequency of recaps
2. Does the facilitator:
Make you feel at ease
Talk too much or too little
Appreciate your contribution
3. Do the participants:
Actively participate
Come on time
IV. Suggestions for Improvements
What are your suggestions:
1. Participants:
2. Facilitator:
3. Monitors:
