<title>Forestry policies in the Asia-Pacific region: A review of country papers</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
It is extremely difficult to summarise the major themes and policy issues from the collection of comprehensive and thought-provoking papers presented to this Regional Expert Consultation. I will not attempt to make detailed comments on each Country Paper individually, but have attempted to find general themes that recur throughout all the Asia-Pacific papers (though to differing degrees). The intention is to facilitate discussion and the constructive exchange of views and experiences between participants at the workshop.
Given the great diversity between countries in their background situations and policy directions for the future, obviously not all comments apply to all countries. Even within regional groupings like ASEAN, South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and the South Pacific Forum, member countries have different pasts, presents and future prospects. Thus, it would be absurd to expect to see uniform policies or problems, and it should be no surprise that policy directions seem to be going in opposite directions in some countries. We will attempt to understand why this is so, and what can be learnt from each other's experience.
As an outsider (but a very interested observer over the past 20 years) perhaps I can present a slightly different view of the processes and results, that might be useful to those directly and intimately involved in policy formulation and implementation.
Anyone writing on the subject of policy reveals something about himself - the questions one considers important, the priorities, whether we focus on Institutions, laws, processes or people. I have tried to focus on economic behaviour of people, industry and government, rather than on legal or technical/silvicultural issues. This is not to imply those are unimportant - I merely reflect my own interests.
Whether or not an agenda for policy reform or policy research emerges from this meeting, and if so, what it is, depends on those attending this Workshop and their national politicians. I would not dare comment on what is "wrong" with any country's existing policies or means of implementation, but do suggest we could all benefit from impartial critical evaluation, even if that means questioning some of our fundamental beliefs and presumptions about Forestry.
This paper is primarily based on the Country Papers presented to the Consultation. An edited collection of these papers is expected to be published by mid-1993 as an FAO Forestry Paper.
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 What is a national forestry policy and what is it for?
1.2 Realism
1.3 Hitting a moving target
1.4 The process is important
1.5 Some common themes in the country papers
1.1 What is a national forestry policy and what is it for?
As the collection of Country Papers shows, most countries do have a National Forestry Policy statement, but there seem to be major differences in what the Policy means, in the force or authority that it bears, in the amount of guidance or direction given on how and when it is to be implemented and, last but not least, in how the policy was derived.
In some countries, such as Thailand and Indonesia, it is a statement prepared and issued on behalf of the government as a whole; in others (e.g. Malaysia and India) the primary preparation is by the Forestry Department, but it is then sanctioned and issued by the National government; in yet others (e.g. Bangladesh, Fiji and China) it is really only the policy of the Forestry Department or its Ministry.
If it is the policy of the entire government, we should expect it to have broad National support, and so be more effective in reconciling differences between government Ministries, particularly the thorny question of competing landuses. However, the paper from Thailand suggests this has not happened there. The policy statement may or may not be accompanied by a mechanism for resolving differences between Ministries or Departments.
We are all aware of instances where the pursuit of another sector's goals has had unintended negative effects on the forestry sector. Good intentions to protect and conserve forests have been swept aside in the face of imperatives to grow more food and provide more irrigation (as in India) or to generate more foreign exchange, from cassava exports in Thailand or from log exports in PNG and Solomon Islands. Even good intentions within the forestry sector may have had adverse effects, such as the Nationalisation of Nepal's forests in 1957; or trade restrictions to protect infant industries.
One fact is self-evident - as "statements of intent" all the national policies could not be challenged. It is obvious that much careful thought has gone into setting national ideals for the forestry sector -all the goals are worthy, even unassailable. As the Malaysian paper states succinctly, no government would ever knowingly choose policy objectives that were not socially ideal. However, as the Pakistan paper also points out, Policy is what is implemented on the ground. It is not what is preserved and decorated on the shelf. The taste of the pudding lies in eating it, and the test of policy lies in its implementation. There is no use in formulating a policy if it cannot be implemented.
So is a National Forestry Policy something that sits on the shelf? There may be a role as a reference but I believe its prime purpose is as a guide to making good decisions which can be effectively implemented, and as a standard by which results are assessed. As the Fiji paper stated, "Writing the policy is easy - but it is the implementation that counts."
This paper does not dwell on "what ought to be" - as professional foresters we believe we are all well aware of that, and have been so for many years. But is National Forest Policy the exclusive preserve of foresters?
The current international pre-occupation with the conservation values of tropical forests has been reflected in National Forest Policy statements of many countries represented here, for decades, even a century. What we need to be concerned about are:
whether the balance between production and conservation, between commercial, subsistence and social benefits, still accords with our societies' ever-changing priorities;
whether the implementation of our policy intentions has been effective; and
whether there have been any unexpected or undesirable consequences of the way we have attempted to implement them.
Thus much of the controversy, and perhaps need for reforms, is NOT about what the ultimate social-welfare goals are, but about the efficiency and equity of the more specific strategies and tactics (the policy instruments) applied to achieve those goals.
Thus I suggest we do not need research on what policy goals ought to be, but we might usefully conduct research:
to obtain a thorough information base for policy formulation;
to assess the impacts, effectiveness, equity and efficiency of alternative policy instruments; and
to analyse why apparently sound policies are sometimes implemented poorly, or not implemented at all.
It would be ironic to conclude that not only have we failed to achieve some of our policy objectives, but in some cases, the very measures we took have contributed to making matters even worse in some unexpected ways, or if the small gains made by good forestry policies have been overwhelmed by negative effects from agricultural, energy, international trade or transport policies, for example.
As the World Bank (1992) clearly shows, most of the major environmental problems in developing countries are not due to the pursuit of economic development, but rather are due to bad economic policies: poorly-defined property rights; under-pricing of resources; state allocations and subsidies; and neglect of non-marketed social benefits. Instead of trying to devise new policies to stop further resource and environmental deterioration while promoting real development, we should first try to eliminate those (legal, social, political and institutional) factors that cause or exacerbate the problems.
1.2 Realism
National Forest Policy should be based on a realistic assessment of the current situation as it exists on the ground.
Do the areas to be managed or protected as forests actually still exist as forests today? Do they have a resident population?
Should we declare a Class I watershed, in which no habitation or cultivation is allowed, if there are 500,000 people living there, with no other place to go and no other way to survive?
Should we assume that the State Forests and the Forest Department will be responsible for supplying the national requirement for timber and fuelwood, if in fact three-quarters is already coming from the household gardens and from farmers' plots, as in Bangladesh?
Should we assume that small farmers will grow trees, if their land tenure is still insecure, if the markets for the trees/products are uncertain, or if there are administrative impediments (like having to get a permit to harvest a crop of trees the farmer's family planted, especially of so-called "Royal" species)?
Some country papers contain unrealistic estimates of the remaining areas of natural forests. Not only can this be misleading when formulating effective programs, but can "backfire" against the forestry Profession and Departments. In some countries, including India, foresters officially denied the rate of deforestation for decades, insisting that everything was fine. When remote sensing revealed the facts, foresters were thought to be foolish, incompetent, malicious or negligent. As a result, governments and the public tend to lose faith in forest services as integrated resource managers, and forestry institutions are under serious challenge. Part of the backlash is an aversion to almost any form of commercial logging in natural forests, and often to exotic plantations as well. Defending unrealistic illusions can be fatal to our professional credibility!
1.3 Hitting a moving target
Policies tend to be long-lived, but the socio-economic context can change quite rapidly. Occasionally we devise policies for situations which no longer exist. For example, over the past ten years there has been a tremendous increase in recognition of the importance of trees and forests in meeting the basic needs of subsistence farmers. Some countries' policies have been revised, to varying degrees, away from pre-occupation with industrial timber, towards these needs. However, in many (but certainly not all) countries or districts, subsistence farmers are rapidly disappearing. Very few farmers are untouched by commercial cash-cropping, markets and off-farm income. The type of forest and forest produce that people need, continually evolves and it is possible, to the extent that the market economy spreads, that remaining viable farmers may even prefer commercial timber trees than fuelwood and fodder species. We need to constantly monitor the direction our policies are aimed in,
as well as their effectiveness and results.
Similarly, policies have been suggested to ease the transition from shifting to (more sustainable) sedentary agriculture, but the transition could be right out of agriculture! "Shifting Agriculture" has been used to cover a great range of different activities:
traditional/indigenous systems include: nomads; those who rotate their houses and gardens around defined territories; and those whose villages are fixed, but their gardens rotate.
Alternatively, temporary slash and burn agriculture is often practiced by newcomers-squatters-lowland migrants, often with support from influential persons, to produce cash crops.
It would be very naive to assume all these people will become settled farmers, especially with intensification and mechanisation of agriculture. We should actively seek views from agricultural colleagues about trends in input costs and output prices, which will largely determine how many people can and do remain as farmers in future. It is quite likely throughout Asia, especially in the economies with relatively high economic growth and slower population growth, that the future number and percentage of farmers (or even rural population in total) will be much less than today.
1.4 The process is important
I have already argued that getting effective results is more important than formulating a high-sounding policy which is a statement of good intent but could be either based on unrealistic data or mistaken directions. But now I want to argue that getting good results in practice, depends not only on having good policies (realistic, rational, consistent, efficient, etc) but also on the process by which the policy (and subsequent strategies) is formulated.
The Country papers generally refer only briefly to the process by which the National Forestry policy has been derived. For example, in Thailand, there is a large and very high-level committee representing almost every agency that could possibly be interested. In Indonesia, the Minister of Forests takes advice from his Directors-General, who are advised by Directors. In India, the Central Board of Forestry has the National Minister as chair, and all State Forestry ministers assisted by their Chief Conservators. In other countries such as Nepal and PNG, the national policy has recently been revised after lengthy consultations under the TFAP or "Forestry Master Plan" processes.
Despite all these differences, most National Forest Policy statements basically are pushed and driven by foresters - they generally arise through the national forestry agency (Department, Ministry, etc) and so tend to reflect the concerns, aspirations and professional views (perhaps even the social and political views) of the agency's staff. This can give a very narrow perspective, and a pre-occupation with the agency's functions, its concerns and the territory under its control.
Recognition of Stakeholders
In comparison, consider a broadly-based participatory process where ALL the interested Stakeholders have an opportunity to express their interest, concerns, ideas and energy.^1 Social conflicts have arisen world-wide, where government forest services have recognised few stakeholders other than wood-processing industries. For example, India's 1878 Forest Act really only recognised the Forest. Department and the timber industry as having legitimate interest in forests (for industrial, urban and military use). Traditional users and uses were prohibited or heavily restricted. By defining collection of leaves and deadwood, or "Minor Forest Produce" as privileges (not a right) local people were excluded from any say in forest management and denied any traditional powers to regulate who used forests when and for what. Customary management of forests was replaced by an open-access regime. This is also true for many other countries.
^1 Although Stakeholder theory was developed for the successful management of private corporations, it offers valuable insights into the management of any large complex structure, even Sectors or national governance. Survival and success depend not only on how well managers perform in furthering shareholders' or owners' interests, but rather on how well managers can balance the competing claims of all the stakeholders in the process.
Many of the unrecognised "stakeholders" in Asia's forests probably would support the National Forestry Policies as presented. However, receiving input and active participation across a wider range of stakeholders (not just Forestry Department and the timber industry) such as other agencies, companies, NGOs and environmental groups, could encourage:
a) better policies or better-informed, more realistic policies;
There should be much less chance of pursuing policies which are out of tune with people's real needs and aspirations, or which are based on faulty premises or data, if all the issues and options have been widely discussed before reaching a consensus. Stakeholders' different perceptions can bring new insights into what is possible, causes of problems etc.
b) continuous feedback on the effectiveness of policy measures;
c) greater commitment by all parties to seeing the policy successfully im«««Valoare a indentului diferita de cele prezente in lista actuala»»»«««Valoare a indentului diferita de cele prezente in lista actuala»»»plemented. Voluntary compliance of local communities in forestry programs may be higher when they have been involved in the formulation of those programs. One frequently cited obstacle to effective policy implementation is a lack of political will or support, but involvement of stakeholders in formulation is an effective means of getting widespread popular support, which could subsequently be reflected in politicians' attitudes to forestry and hence in budget allocations, legislation etc.^2
d) clarification of all the actors and their roles. Forestry agencies (and the timber industry) are not the only players involved in the forestry sector; the other stakeholders are now being heard - not only what they want, but what they could contribute (skills, knowledge, labour) and what support or assistance (if any) they would need, to do so.
^2 The success of urban forestry programs (although small and perhaps despised by conventional foresters) can contribute to establishing a strong political base and support for forestry in general.
What do China, the Philippines, Nepal and New Zealand all have in common? They are each exploring and implementing new perceptions on how forestry activities can be undertaken - Who should do what, and what reforms are needed to make it work? They have recognised that government forestry cannot (and need not) do everything needed in the sector, and so responsibility and authority is devolved to other players: farmers, community groups, NGOs or companies.
New institutions are emerging to redress the balance between all segments of society who claim an interest in the future use of forests.^3 The 1988 Indian policy is quite "green" reflecting the political and institutional changes to incorporate environmental and NGO stakeholders.
^3 For example, many traditional Forest Services are being subsumed into mega-Departments of Environment, Natural Resources, Conservation &/or Land Management - a political reflection of the loss of confidence in Foresters because we were seen to be too closely tied to the timber industry and ignoring the impacts on others. Forest Services in two Australian states no longer exist - their functions now subsumed within Departments of Conservation and Environment, and Conservation and Land Management (CALM). Responsibility for all natural forests in New Zealand now lies with the Ministry of Environment and the plantation forests have been privatised - NZ Forest Service has disappeared. The Philippines has DENR. The Indian Forest Service is now within the Ministry of Environment.
Nevertheless, there are potentially serious problems in arriving at a participatory consensus on forest policy:
Not all stakeholders have equal or similar information or power to negotiate - local communities may be disadvantaged; major stakeholders could be cabinet ministers or generals who also hold logging concessions;
Who is responsible for coordinating stakeholders' interests. Many Forest Services may no longer have the credibility to do so.
Perhaps if governments want to ensure real public participation in policy formulation and implementation, they may need to enable community groups and NGOs to participate, e.g. by providing grants to enable them to prepare submissions, to take time from daily work to participate.
1.5 Some common themes in the country papers
The country papers contain three major recurring, common concerns:
Population pressure-encroachment-shifting cultivation
Industrial Forestry, Forest Industries, Markets and Trade
Farm Forestry, Agroforestry and activities outside forestry reserves.
In the following Sections, I attempt to address each of these, with particular regard to the impacts, effectiveness and unintended consequences of the existing policies; and the possibility for evolution of new policies, new instruments and/or new institutional arrangements.
Although the status quo has imperfections, it is often strongly entrenched. Perhaps by examining those countries where changes are underway, we might learn more about the process, as well as the content, of policy reform. Frequently the issues that arise in implementation, have their roots in how the policies were formulated, and by whom.
<section>3</section>
2. Landuse pressures, people and trees
2.1 Population pressures
2.2 Structures of production
2.3 Why are so many of the "Reserved Forests" of Asia treeless?
2.4 Landuse planning
2.1 Population pressures
Table 1 presents information of areas of forests and woodlands, rural populations and forest areas per (rural) capita in Asian countries. Without wanting to imply some deterministic relationship between forest policies and forest per capita, it does seem that forest policies reflect socio-economic priorities that are fundamentally different, between those countries with larger forest resources/capita (Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar and Laos, for example) and those with very low ratios (e.g. Bangladesh, China, India, Nepal, Pakistan and the Philippines).
Table 1 Area of Forest & Woodlands, Rural Population and Forest area/capita, in Tropical Asia
Country
Forest Area (000 ha)
Rural Population (000)
Area/cap (ha/person)
South Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Southeast Asia
Indonesia
Kampuchea
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Thailand
Viet Nam
ASIA
Tropical LDCs
Source: World Resources Report (1991)
Westoby (1987) argued that ultimately, the purpose of all forestry is social. He differentiated between Industrial Forestry (well-suited for relatively resource rich countries to contribute to economic development, employment creation, foreign exchange earnings) and Social Forestry (to maintain rural welfare or "to stop it deteriorating further" through provision of basic needs). He might have added that Environmental or Protection Forestry (including watershed and wildlife management) is equally important to both groups.
National Forestry Policies nearly always have recognised all three elements, but the relative emphasis or balance keeps changing. Most societies would like more of all three classes of forest benefit, but governments have many other priorities and do not have unlimited budgets. Is it possible to get some more of each, through greater skills, technology or efficiency, rather than trade-off one against another?
A spectrum ranges from those countries struggling to provide basic needs from their forests, to those with ample resources for economic development and export industries. Fast growing fuelwood or industrial plantations may complement either strategy: to move from deficiency to self-sufficiency to exportable surplus; or to compensate for the progressive phasing out of logging in natural forests.
At the risk of over-generalisation, we might consider a spectrum where the relative emphasis changes as follows:
Philippines
Bangladesh, Nepal
Social Forestry, Extension, Devolution of management for remnant forests
China
Pakistan, India
Viet Nam
Thailand
Fast Growing Industrial Plantations
Fiji
Indonesia
Malaysia
PNG
Extraction from relatively abundant natural forests
Laos
I stress that this is not simply a question of population size or density relative to areas of forests, but too many people without decent alternative livelihoods. In many parts of Philippines, India, Bangladesh, Viet Nam, China and Thailand, the economy has not grown fast enough and in a way that creates enough employment opportunities. (Cruz, 1992) Being a forest encroacher, eking out a marginal and illegal existence is not an attractive occupation, but a strategy of last resort when no better options exist.
Perhaps the opposite illustrates the point better. In Malaysia, with rapid industrialisation, rural people are moving out of the villages to work in urban industry. In fact there are shortages of rural labour in particular times/places. Malaysia's forests are now relatively safe from encroachment for the same reason as in the USA or Australia - most people have better (more secure, more profitable, less dangerous) ways of making a living!
There is a myth about rapidly disappearing forests in Nepal's Middle Hills, but in reality, the forests are starting to expand, in both area and density. As alternative occupations in the market economy appear, basic agriculture in the Hills has become less attractive. Also, as people migrate to the Terai, population pressure on the Hill forests is in fact decreasing. A dramatic decline in livestock numbers has greatly reduced the demand for forest fodder. Terraced land that has been cultivated for many years is being allowed or encouraged to revert to forest.
It may be correct, but too simplistic, to observe that forests have disappeared because of population growth, increasing pressure for land for agriculture and settlement, for timber and fuel, and "inadequate protection and inadequate afforestation". Why could the pressures not be accommodated? Why were past efforts "inadequate"? The whole question of the behaviour of poor rural households, in their production, consumption, livelihood and migration decisions, requires further research. Some Forestry agencies assume that they understand such behaviour, but in many cases this is contradicted by their programs' ineffectiveness. Small and marginal farmers are sometimes thought of as a plague of locusts bent on destroying trees and forests, but in many cases, these people are actually major producers of trees and even supplying towns with their excess fuelwood from their own household trees.
2.2 Structures of production
Trees and forests can be managed in many ways, and numerous possible institutional arrangements exist in the Asian region (e.g. ownership of forests; responsibility for their management; responsibility for harvesting; and responsibility for processing and utilisation can all be by the State, private or, communal). The appropriate form of forestry, the appropriate structure of production, the question of who is responsible for what in the forestry sector, cannot be isolated from national macro-economic and historical factors. Again, it would be nonsense to argue for a single "correct" system, but we may learn from analysing the performance and implications of systems in use.
Outlined in Table 2 below are some of the attributes of two widely differing systems. Characteristics of a particular system depend on who is managing it - the attributes within each system, are intimately and intrinsically related to each other.
Table 2 Two Production Systems
State Forestry
Community Forestry, Tree Husbandry and Farm Forestry
Objectives
One dimensional, raw material for industry, protection
Multipurpose and socio-economic objectives. Related to the consumer & Producer. Self-reliance.
Technology
Imported, centralised, precedence over local technologies. Uniform and strictly adhered to
Varies. Indigenous, locally manageable. Imported technology must suit resources and needs.
Local Institutions.
Unimportant as long as no encroachment
Important. Used and supported as a resource.
Peoples Participation
Insignificant. People are target groups and consumers and to be motivated, uplifted and/or employed.
A requirement for relevant production. People are a resource, an asset to be supported. Involvement and responsibility
Role of People versus Experts
People are the problem experts the solution
People are the solution and a resource. Experts support them and their activities & the development process.
Local Solutions
Uniform
Diverse
Land
Government
Communal. Village, private.
Labour
Employed
Employed within the local system or self-employed.
Organisation
Centralised "work order" system
Local, village production unit (e.g. extended family).
Professional Sphere
Segmentation, "Forestry"
Integration with other farming activities.
Structure and Magnitude
Few large plantations with uniform management.
A large number of small areas with a variety of input requirements and production.
Legislation
Protective
Productive
Time Perspective
Long Term
Short term, or limited resources for delayed benefits.
Relation to other activities
Separate
Integrated in space and time in the small farmers' production system.
Source: Ohlsson & Byron, 1989
Many government agencies, even if established explicitly to manage many small areas of mixed forests for a wide array of public benefits, have tended, over time, towards:
concentrating on fewer, larger areas;
managing these according to uniform prescriptions, rules or guidelines;
managing for one or two dominant outputs rather than diversity (and the dominant output is likely to be wood because it is readily quantifiable and marketable).
All these attributes are entirely predictable, given the nature of the institutions and the way large organisations operate. The attributes of the second system are not just the opposite to the first, but reflect who makes decisions and why. Yet the production system of "State Forestry" ie what the Forest Services do, is now almost synonymous with "Forestry" - most of the other variants have been relegated to exceptions in many countries. A number of national Forest Policies state that all forest lands belong to the State, and/or that all forest plantations shall be under the control of the Forestry authority.
2.3 Why are so many of the "Reserved Forests" of Asia treeless?
This is not a riddle - much of the officially reserved forests in many countries of South and Southeast Asia are actually treeless. In some cases, the land is in fact productive agricultural land, the illegal farms of people who "squatted" there many years ago. In some countries, the Reserved Forest boundaries have been drawn around areas of forest which indigenous people had consciously managed for centuries, before being displaced by colonial authorities, or labelled as encroachers. However, in many more cases, the land is barren, eroding "wastelands".^4
^4 We should be careful about the word "wastelands" as this may represent only the official view - local people may find them useful for some grazing, collection of medicinal plants and fuels etc. Their production may be much below their potential, but not necessarily zero.
A series of reports about "The Uncultivated Half of India" showed almost half the country was virtual wasteland, far below its potential productivity in any sense, and much of this was government-owned Forests, but treeless. "Forest Land" (under the control of a Forestry Department) is not necessarily forested land (having trees on it). In many cases, Forest (Department) Land has no trees, while many trees are grown by farmers on land which is not Forest Land. Most of the country papers recognise this - we are no longer surprised by treeless Forests!
In Thailand, there are now, officially, 10 million ha of barren, treeless, degraded and degrading lands which are not occupied or regularly used by anyone - the classic wasteland. A further 12 million ha of land, also under the legal control of the Royal Forest Department, is actually occupied and used by farmers. This is said to be illegal and "temporary" but there are houses, shops, roads, with electricity services.^5 Some of these farmers grow trees, but not always of the type preferred by RFD e.g. Mango, Mulberry, Kapok (Bombax spp). Only 3.07 million ha of the 24.4 million ha being cultivated in Thailand has legal title - much of the remainder is actually "Forest Land" used to grow cassava and corn for export.^6
^5 They may pay taxes on these lands and receive extension services from other government departments, suggesting this use of the "Reserved Forest" is far from temporary. Their illegal land tenure could even be recognised by banks as collateral.
^6 Phantumvanit (1990) calculated that a 10 % increase in the world price of cassava led to a 16% increase in loss of forests (but presumably not the reverse - if prices fall, the deforested land may just be abandoned - not restored). Panayouto (1987) reported that construction of a major highway in Northeast Thailand was followed by logging and shifting agriculture, resulting in the loss of over 1 million ha (of what was continuous forests in 1973) in only 4 years.
Although there are officially 100,000 hectares of sal (Shorea robusta) forests in northern Bangladesh, which was the traditional home and source of livelihood of the Garot Tribes, probably less than 20 % of this area is still recognisable as (heavily degraded) forest. Most is farmland; illegal logging has continued steadily for twenty years after an official total ban on logging in these forests; the modest areas of plantation established on areas reclaimed from "encroachers" have generally failed, for technical reasons, and due to fires and deliberate vandalism.
In the Philippines, it is estimated that there are 6 million people living in the National Forests, and another 8 million on the forest fringes - among the poorest in the country with an average income under $US 200/year. Of 15 million ha of "Forest Land", only 6.5 million ha is now forested, and less than 1 million ha of this is primary forest. Some barangays and towns in the Philippines (e.g. Quezon, Mt Makeling in Laguna, and in Misamis Occidental in Mindanao) are in the middle of Forest Reserves and National Parks. Within the Reserved Forests of Idukki District (Kerala, India) are hospitals, colleges, the District Headquarters and large shopping centres. In Indonesia, the town of Bukit Soeharto in Kalimantan Timur lies entirely within Government forest. Over 12 million ha of Indonesia's Reserved Forest is reported to be treeless.
How has this situation arisen?
a) From the scientists' and technicians' perspective,^7 forests are disappearing because there are too many people, they use too much wood too wastefully, their trees are too slow-growing, etc. -purely technical explanations. As Ohlsson & Byron (1989) observed, this view totally ignores the role of small farmers as producers of fuelwood and poles on their lands. Although depicted as parasitic consumers of fuelwood, they often consume less than they grow, and use inferior substitutes themselves so they can then sell the surplus for cash.
^7 Similar to "people starve because there is not enough food, so if we grow more food, there will be no more starvation."
Despite its many deficiencies, this viewpoint is still common, as a quick technical fix is sought to alleviate what are in fact long-term social and structural-policy-institutional problems. "Solutions" include:
get rid of the population pressure;
establish vast government plantations of fast-growing exotic species as fuelwood plantations; and
introduce more fuel-efficient chulas (stoves), etc.
b) Another frequent explanation for the disappearance of forests is an absence of law and order, which enables the popular masses to overflow onto government forest lands, encroach, steal wood, and so on. The obvious remedy is stricter enforcement of the law, by the police, army and forest service in combination, as has been tried in countries as diverse as India, Bangladesh, Burma, Philippines, Viet Nam, Indonesia and Thailand. In none of these countries has this approach been very through higher yielding varieties, successful. It is logistically impossible to protect so many hectares from so many people, day and night, even with the combined military might of governments. Moreover, if people who have no other place to live and no alternative livelihood, are expelled from one part of a forest, they simply find another patch to settle in, and the process continues. Yet the Bangladesh paper, for example, calls for harsher legislation and penalties, and more armed guards for
enforcement!
c) Most social scientists recognise the "Tragedy of the Commons" argument. Because the government agency is unable to effectively enforce the property rights it claims, forest reserves are really nobody's forests, they are everybody's forests, and so each individual has an incentive to take as much as s/he can, as quickly as possible, before somebody else does. Further, under these rules, it would be entirely irrational for any individual to invest his/her effort in managing, conserving or improving the forests, since everybody else or anybody else, may capture all the rewards.
If the neighbouring small and ex-farmers have no viable alternative than to degrade the land with short-term exploitative temporary agriculture, to steal logs, to collect fuelwood for sale in urban markets, then it is unlikely that any amount of coercion, extension or persuasion will alter their practices.^8 Farmers use methods requiring little investment so that eviction is "affordable" - a possibility these encroachers must live with. This pattern has existed in Indonesia, Philippines, Viet Nam, Bangladesh, Thailand, India and Nepal.
^8 Forest Department threats, if sufficiently draconian and vigorously enforced, may make a small impact in the short term, but given the widespread failure of this approach, instead we see the helpful, smiling face of the forestry extension officer. He may look like the same Forest Guard who used to intimidate the local people, he may still be armed, he may still arrest people on the 3 days per week when he is not on Extension duty, and he may not know anything of any value to extend to the local people!
But the devastation caused by these temporary agricultural practices of migrant squatters, does not negate our general argument of the small farmers as professionals, where they have secure land tenure, for example in Betagi Village in Bangladesh. Outsiders with high status have undertaken to protect and support about 80 families, essentially guaranteeing secure access to land. With very little external support - mainly advice - the villagers have developed a land use system which generates incomes well above average for Bangladesh.^9
^9 The majority of the villagers have about 2 hectares of land, most of which is hilly and undulating. Investing their knowledge, skills and labour in the land to which they have reasonably secure access, they have shown their potential.
Experts and professionals frequently overlook small farmers' professional competence because their criteria and definitions are different, and because the farmers are frequently denied secure access to land, through institutional land-denial mechanisms. In brief, small farmers and landless may be major instruments for forest destruction but they are not the cause. The cause is the political and socio-economic framework, expressed as denial of secure access to land, to knowledge and technology and other inputs. Economic signals from "the marketplace" are frequently distorted by misguided government pricing policies.
"Shifting cultivators no more cause deforestation than foot-soldiers cause wars!"^10
^10 I am not trying to idealise the shifting cultivators nor defend their contribution to deforestation, merely to illustrate different points of view.
d) Some analysts reject the view of the ignorant masses who sabotage the best efforts of the dedicated forest services by their incessant encroachment, fires, grazing or shifting cultivation. Rather they observe that much of the deforestation has been at the instigation, sponsorship or patronage from extremely powerful quarters. This applies to both illegal logging (in unauthorised areas or in excess of legal quotas) and encroachment. This appears to occur on a large scale in parts of Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Indonesia and (until very recently) in the Philippines. One-third of that country's 30 million ha were controlled by Timber Licence Holders from 1971 to 1977, while local communities, including cultural minorities, were prosecuted for attempting to eke out a living by shifting cultivation.
To summarise this theory, the peasant is not the culprit of the deforestation, but a victim and a scapegoat. If there is any element of truth in this diagnosis of the problem of the disappearance of the forest from the Reserved Forest Land, what then would be an appropriate course of action?^11
^11 Where government salaries, always low, have been continuously eroded by inflation, to the extent that it is impossible to subsist on a government salary, then a supplementary source of income is needed. As one of my Ugandan students said, "Ridiculously low salaries have turned Forest Officials into Forest Thieves!"
e) The influence of other government agencies have frequently overwhelmed forest conservation. The "Grow More Food" campaign in India (and in China) boosted food production by expanding cultivated areas, not intensification (until the late 1960s). In India, 43 million ha of tree-cover was cleared 1951-76. This campaign also required irrigation - not only dams which flooded forests, but also powerlines, new settlements. Displaced graziers were forced up the hills and into the forests. The expansion of mining industries has also helped destroy forests (e.g. the iron mines of Bastar District of Madhya Pradesh). The elimination of malaria has been a contributing factor to deforestation in many countries, by making lowland forests habitable.
A conceptual failure?
Thus far, our analysis has looked at "Execution Failures" - in practice, some efforts have been unsuccessful, by certain criteria. One might question the very concept of having areas of land set aside by governments, purely or primarily for timber production by a professional, para-military organisation, in a densely populated country where many farmers are denied farm lands. If this concept itself is irrational or unbelievable, then we should expect serious flaws in its implementation!
A concept that generally assumes:
that there are no people in the forests, when in fact there are many;
that people can be excluded from Reserves, when in fact this is often impossible;
that "Forestry" must be separated from agriculture - that tree farming to produce industrial wood is incompatible with and more important than other human endeavours, on these particular lands called Reserved Forests";
that policy instruments and strategies can be applied to all people across all parts of the country; and
that "the people" can not, and will not, grow trees when in fact there is ample evidence that they can, have and still do;
seems a weak basis for national forestry.
At the time of the creation of most Forest Services throughout the world (1860-1920 approximately) there was an almost universal presumption that only governments could be trusted to manage and protect forests; that short-sighted people would inevitably destroy forests and never regenerate them; and so Forestry was "nationalised" and professionals had to defend forests against a hostile sea of agriculture especially. This led to a "fortress mentality", protecting and guarding our islands (Reserves). We had a legislated mandate and responsibility for everything that happened on our territory, but had very little to do or say about what happened outside reserves. The sea between our forest islands was abandoned to agriculture. Many bureaucratic institutions established to practice "Forestry" adopted the production system described in Table 2 as "State Forestry". This might have "worked successfully" in certain times (the colonial period) and in certain places (mainly Western
industrialised countries) though we need to carefully circumscribe the term "successfully".
But in many countries of Asia, we can see today the consequences of its weakness in both respects -not only has implementation in the field been questionable, but the whole concept of "Who was to do what, where and why", may have been inappropriate to the reality of those countries, right from the outset of "State Forestry" in Asia. Philippines has now decided the concept is inappropriate, and is handing management control back to local communities. Nepal is transferring management responsibility to traditional user groups. China will rely on the commercial activities of millions of farmers (many of whom will associate as shareholder companies) to produce plantation timber. But other countries fight on, trying to defend territory they are not using and cannot adequately protect, against people who need land to survive. Perhaps Pakistan should be considered fortunate in NOT having vast areas of reserved forests to protect, or be chained down with! Rather, Pakistani forestry
has gone out into the farmlands in a very successful collaborative arrangement to benefit the farmers, the society and the environment.
2.4 Landuse planning
This issue seems to dominate many of the Country Papers, and numerous commentaries by outside experts. It seems to have three components:
Whether a mechanism for land use planning exists? (e.g. not in Thailand, but the Philippines has an "Alienable and Disposable" process.)
Whether decisions/plans are actually made?
Whether they are adhered to?
Because Malaysia has no National Landuse Plan "the Permanent Forest Estate is vulnerable to excision and conversion". Although there is no planning mechanism for such conversions, Environmental Impact Statements are now required if over 500 ha of primary forest is affected.^12 In Thailand, it seems that landuse planning is difficult; even when done it may not be enforceable, or is easily overturned, and depletion and degradation is often facilitated, even encouraged by other Ministries, despite the National Forest Policy. Many government forest departments have legal responsibility and rights over the forests, but have difficulties in effectively enforcing such rights.
^12 This is the unfortunate situation now in Australia also, where EIS is being as a de facto landuse-planning tool.
A National Land Use Policy is sometimes cited as a pre-requisite for the National Forest Policy. However, this can be debated at three levels: is it really necessary? is it really possible? would it be followed?
Potential improvements in Landuse Planning depend on the precise situation and diagnosis within each country, but perhaps they might include:
1. More effective, intelligent, participatory and hence more enforceable landuse planning, including effective liaison with related agencies and local people;
2. A National Resource Information Centre, which independently monitors the status of all natural resources, and perhaps advises governments on land suitability and resource conflicts;
3. Land reform and rural development, e.g. granting long term leasehold to local farmers/communities who are in a position to effectively manage forests, and
4. More productive, intensive agriculture and improved sustainable farming systems.
Forestry officials have concentrated on managing large government estates, as raw materials sources for large-scale industry. Much less time and effort was available for:
managing the public goods and downstream social-environmental benefits from forests;
involving local people in the management of government (or communal or private) forests;
or
mediating with Agriculture, Environment, Transport, Public Works etc regarding landuse allocation.
Our accounting procedures have not been geared to stress efficient management of valuable natural assets on behalf of the whole society, or even towards profitable marketing of commodities - typically we have tried to maximise physical outputs, rather than net benefits.
<section>4</section>
3. Industrial forestry and forest industries
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Industrial plantations
3.3 Pricing & allocation of timber concessions
3.1 Introduction
After World War II, many Southeast Asian countries encouraged increased exploitation of their natural forests as a source of foreign exchange to finance National development. Market demand has progressively expanded. Yet the evidence from countless independent studies suggests governments have consistently been unable to collect the full economic value from forest exploitation. Logs have been generally under-priced^13 while processed exports may have earned far greater foreign exchange employment and value added than log exports (but many experts doubt this is so).
^13 And many commentators believe they still are in Sarawak and Indonesia, for example.
The allocation and pricing of timber rights is more commonly recognised as a major issue by outside commentators than those directly involved (in Government Forest Services). Some economists (e.g. Gillis; Repetto) have argued that developing country governments have consistently failed to collect anything like the full potential value of the timber (or bamboo or rattan) being sold to industry, especially for exports.^14
^14 However, logging concessionaires may pay close to the full economic rent - one-third to the government and two-thirds to those who collect it. Stumpages might not be set artificially low out of ignorance of the true value of logs - the lower the stumpage, the higher the quasi-rent or surplus value that can be extracted from the concessionaire, given the market value of the logs. If the private profitability of logging was not so great, then the possibility of recognising the public benefits of conservation may be higher.
This raises the issue: should governments seek to collect the full economic rent from harvesting forests? In many countries (including Canada and New Zealand) a deliberate trade-off was made -foregoing potential stumpage revenue, to attract and foster new private industries. It does work but it is almost certainly not economically efficient or cost effective! New Zealand has now abandoned this practice. In other circumstances, governments deliberately forego potential revenue to achieve greater control over environmental impacts of logging (coupe design, road standards, species, girth limits, etc.).
As explained in Section 1.4, we will now examine aspects of industrial forestry and forest industries around the region, particularly which actors are responsible for what activities, and whether government policies have set out a clear framework to provide the appropriate incentives/disincentives and regulatory mechanisms to achieve efficient and equitable results.
3.2 Industrial plantations
As noted in section 2.1 above, plantations may be for site rehabilitation or local fuelwood supplies, but the major interest still is in industrial plantations, especially using tropical acacias and eucalypts for pulpwood (Southern China, Thailand, Viet Nam, Malaysia, Indonesia and India).^15 Malaysia's Compensatory Plantation project began in 1982 with the aim of establishing 188,200 ha by 1995, of utility-grade species to meet domestic timber needs. The main species are Acacia mangium, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, gmelina and pine.
^15 The plantations of mahogany (Swetenia macrophyla) in Fiji for high-value sawlogs and veneer logs, are a notable exception.
Where governments concede that current rates of logging natural forests are unsustainable, the rate of logging is gradually slowing while more and more emphasis is placed on fast-growing exotic plantations. For example Sabah now has over 50,000 ha, but the target area of plantation is:
* Sabah Forest Development Authority - 100,000 ha by 1998;
Sabah Softwoods Sdn Bhd 61,000 by 1990; and
Sabah Forest Industries Sdn Bhd - 60,000 ha.
This would produce at least 6 million cubic metres of logs per year, enough to satisfy all existing industries. No further new industries are planned, but the intention is to upgrade existing mills to produce higher value-added products. It is inevitable that the mix of products and exports will change from indigenous species to plantation timbers.
Sri Lanka's Forest Policy recognises that:
"Plantation forests require careful siting and careful selection of species. Guidelines stating the reasons for plantation establishment should be prepared taking into account present socio-economic conditions and priorities for timber production in non-critical areas".
Conservationists correctly point out that even if the plantations produce as much timber as native forests (or more) they are still not a substitute for the natural ecosystem, for wildlife, and traditional uses by indigenous people, such as foods and medicines. Economists point out that countries are unlikely to receive the high prices currently paid for high-quality natural timbers like Dipterocarps, when they sell their "common" plantation timbers.
Private sector involvement in plantations has generally been small (notwithstanding some examples from large Indian corporations and proposals in Northeast Thailand). Oliva (1988) commented on the general failure of attempts to get ASEAN-region licensees or concessionaires to effectively establish plantations - despite the threats and inducements, it is generally still not in their interests. Many countries are now actively interested in attracting private sector afforestation (as governments attempt to reduce their recurrent expenditures and wonder why "tree-farming" should be a governmental activity anyway).
A 1987 seminar in Sabah^16 listed the following as required incentives:
Secure tenure, fiscal and tax incentives, and extended-term, low-interest credit;
Provision of adequate infrastructure (ports and roads);
Strong R&D expenditure (for technical success) and Human Resources Development (for efficient management); and
Stability of Forest policies over the long term to foster confidence.
^16 "The Future Role of Forest Plantations in the National Economy and Incentives Required to Encourage Forest Plantations" Koto Kinabalu December 1987, supported by the World Bank.
Alternative routes now being explored include contract reforestation, joint ventures and production-sharing in Philippines and leasehold reforestation in Philippines, Nepal, China and India for example. Even where plantation establishment by the private sector is sought, there are legal-institutional impediments like the restriction in India (under land reforms regulations) on any individual or company owning more than approx 20 ha. Although companies cannot buy and afforest land, they are contracting with small farmers, through buy-back arrangements, to ensure their future requirements of raw materials (while simultaneously providing a real financial incentive for tree-farming. Similarly, in China, some of the former forest cooperatives are being converted to equity/shareholder companies, which are then free to employ professional managers or advisors, and to sell their products at free-market prices to industries or the government.^17 It had become very obvious in China as
elsewhere, that paying people just to plant trees, without giving them a financial stake in the final produce, was often a waste of money. The model for commercial farm forestry and co-operative plantation establishment now evolving in China, is quite radical but potentially a very interesting precedent. In principle, it is similar to the sale of the rights to manage and harvest the plantations established by the NZ Forest Service
^17 See "Chinese Farmers versus the Forestry Stocksharing System - a study of Forestry Policy of China" by Li Lukang, presented to this consultation.
3.3 Pricing & allocation of timber concessions
This is another area where policy formulation needs to consider very carefully, "Who are the actors involved? What are the options available? How will various actors respond to each type of policy instrument, or particular rates of tax, etc?"
In assigning rights to the private sector to harvest from government or communal forests, many options exist, with regard to:
scale of operations: for example, in Indonesia, the average size of concessions is 104,000 ha,^18 presenting difficulties in supervision by both the Ministry and the concessionaires. The issuance of 500 concessions in Thailand by 1968, covering 50% of the country, opened up vast new areas for encroachment and official agricultural development.
duration of licence: short-term licences do not encourage long-term stewardship of forests, but even 25-year licences are less than many cutting cycles, destroying any motivation to nurture regrowth. "Cleaning operations" every 5-10 years can be observed. Even with very long term licences, concessionaires may behave as if their tenure is insecure, because of uncertainty about political changes.
harvesting methods to be used: The reports from Thailand, Philippines and Indonesia refer to deficiencies in the various Selection Systems as practiced. Low volumes/ha from selection logging necessitate greater areas logged for a given output, at higher extraction costs. Damage to residuals is often unacceptable. Rather than trying to prescribe and regulate logging methods, a system can be devised whereby operators' commercial self-interest coincides with sustainable forest management.
quantity, grades and sizes to be removed: Again, almost all countries report concerns about "high-grading", or failure to take less-commercially-desirable species, and/or illicit removal of under-sized logs. The calculation and enforcement of meaningful Allowable Annual Cut is notoriously difficult. Again, fiscal incentives may be more effective than regulation.
prices, fees and charges: There are countless instances of stumpages, fees and charges being extremely low. As noted above, it was often to attract new investment; to capture other social benefits like infrastructure and employment. For example, the Bangladesh Forest Industries Development Corp made only notional payments for areas, logs and bamboo for many years. The Hindustan Paper Corp in Kerala paid Rupee 11 ($0.5) per ton of eucalypt pulpwood compared to production costs of R 500. When stumpages were increased to realistic levels, industry contracted leaving excess capacity and demands for more plantations and more logging of natural forests. Subsidising log input prices seems a very inefficient way of creating additional employment,^19 and discourages intensive recovery in mills. The very low Concession Licence Fee (less than $2/ha) and Land & Improvement Tax ($0.5/ha of unlogged concession) in Indonesia encourages large concession areas.
whether reforestation and silvicultural treatment (culling) is required: Clearly the more the logger is required to pay (for reforestation, roads or infrastructure), the less is available as log purchase price, ceteris paribus. The question is whether the logging concessionaire is the best one to undertake these activities? (incentives, efficiency?) If so, should it be by explicit payment rather than by lowering the official sale price of logs, which will distort subsequent decisions.
whether performance bonds are imposed: Performance bonds designed to induce reforestation, have had mixed results in Indonesia. Most companies still find it cheaper to forfeit the reforestation deposit than to replant, considering relative costs, inflation, and administrative costs. The incentive effect clearly depends on the level of the bond, relative to other costs.
transferability/sale of licences/rights: In many countries, the logging rights are not transferable, reducing the incentive to manage the forests to maintain a high residual value. Transferability may impose penalties for not looking after the forest and provide financial rewards (as higher transfer prices) for those who have not high-graded, have protected advanced growth, and installed good infrastructure. Systems like "Evergreen Licences" as in British Columbia (Canada) with claw-back provisions may also be applicable in Asia.
whether export is permitted or some specified processing is required: As one form of indirect subsidy to local industry, countries have operated a two-price scheme, where logs for approved local processing are considerably cheaper than export logs. Accelerated industrialisation has been accomplished in Indonesia & Malaysia, through a whole suite of policy measures linked to trade and tariff policies, tax incentives, log export restrictions, "cheap logs", worker training programs etc. (delos Angeles & Idris, 1990) This is now also becoming a high priority for India, China and Viet Nam. Analysis of the methods and performance of accelerated industrialisation in Indonesia and Malaysia, compared with the relative lack of success of PNG and the Philippines, would be instructive - to address the whole rationale and the empirical performance of the suite of policies. Most independent studies suggest the short-run economic cost to Indonesia has been extremely high. Setting log
prices correctly may be one necessary condition, but it is certainly much more complex.
^18 The largest owners are now believed to control between 2 and 5 million ha. (Tempo 1991)
^19 Manasan (1989) observed that in SE Asia forest industries, only Philippines offered a direct financial incentive to employment, via tax rebates, but that this was ineffective because of other tax concessions.
All these conditions can interact, and trade-offs are possible - changing any one will probably affect potential economic rents and thus bid-prices. In choosing policy measures, we could constantly ask ourselves "What incentive effect is this condition likely to have on a typical private operator, and how will that affect long-term sustainability of forestry, in an environmentally friendly but net-benefit-maximising way?"
While most logging and processing industries throughout the region are in the Private Sector, most countries still have at least one government corporation, e.g. Thailand's FIO, BFIDC in Bangladesh, Nepal Timber Corporation, Perum Perhutanian, Sabah Forest Industries, etc. Why? Do they perform a useful function? are they profitable? are they more environmentally aware and cautious than private industries? or are they just anachronisms from the 1950s experiments with socialism or state capitalism? Very few of these corporations earn profits to pay dividends to the state, particularly if adjustment is made for the heavily subsidised raw materials they get from state forests. Even Myanmar denationalised its forest industries in 1989, except for the teak which remains a state monopoly under Myanmar Timber Enterprises.
Logging Bans and Log Export Bans
The performance of logging industries has come under intense criticism, to the extent of the well known logging ban in Thailand since 1988 and in the Philippines since 1991. We should not only consider whether such measures are warranted or not, and what the implications are, but also ask ourselves why politicians felt required to take such drastic action, particularly if it as against the advice of their own professional staff.^20 If logging bans apply to all trees, this could immediately kill any private interest in plantations or farm forestry. In the Philippines, where local communities are supposed to manage secondary natural forests under long-term sustainable, low-impact regimes, how can they do this if they are not allowed to cut and sell the timber?
^20 The very influential Australian Conservation Foundation is also committed to seeing a total ban on logging in ALL Australian natural forests, as soon as possible. The logic may be hard to follow but the emotive appeal is strong.
Log export bans are not intended as a conservation measure, but as part of a package to encourage accelerated domestic processing, with employment generation and value-added, and hopefully higher net foreign exchange earnings. As noted above, these have a wide and diverse history (e.g. in British Columbia Canada since 1903) but almost invariably have been scorned by economists for the serious distortions in resource allocation that they create. Even Malaysia's successful and widely-acclaimed policies for accelerated industrialisation and "down-stream, value-added processing" have recently been assessed by a World Bank team as economically inefficient and too ambitious.
<section>5</section>
4. Natural forest management
4.1 The multiple benefits of forests
4.2 Devolution of management to user-groups and communities.
4.3 Farm forestry
4.1 The multiple benefits of forests
Multi-purpose sustainable management of natural forests for non-wood forest products, and for non-, consumptive uses (watersheds, bio-diversity, sensitive priority areas etc) is in all the Country reports -the question is how it is implemented! The actions of many forestry agencies and companies, suggest wood production was the only priority, and all the other values (watershed, wildlife, aesthetics, recreation, etc) are tolerable to the extent that they do not interfere too much with wood production. Alternatively, minimum standards for the provision of all these (non-timber production) benefits have been set, and thereafter commercial wood production can be maximised.
There is increasing evidence that the value of conservation, non-timber products and non-consumptive benefits may be greater than commercial logging profits, but are not readily captured. Benefits of commercial logging typically accrue to certain groups in society, and the costs to others. This suggests a need to more equitably resolve rights and responsibilities, and terms of tenure. Natural tropical forests have been exploited as if only two productive resources have value - the timber and the potential (low-quality) agricultural land under it. A third has been consistently overlooked - the forests' capacity to generate income from hundreds of non-wood products. Repetto & Gillis (1988) estimated that the Net Present Value of leaving an Indonesian forest intact was double the NPV of logging it; Myers (1988) calculated the NPV of a Palawan logging operation as $8.6 million, but the loss of revenues to fisheries and tourism was estimated as $32 million.
How can a process be set up, for formulation implementation and monitoring of policies and strategies, which enables ALL the values of the forest to be recognised and, whenever possible, quantified so that if trade-offs have to be made, they are clear deliberate and public?
4.2 Devolution of management to user-groups and communities.
As we have seen, conventional management systems (public ownership, concessions, "State Forestry") have not worked very well in many instances throughout the region. Institutional regimes seem close to major changes, and the Philippines paper points to a new direction in a frank, constructive and radical way.
In Nepal, indigenous and traditional forest management systems, by local "User Groups" is now recognised. The process is now well underway to devolve effective management responsibility back to those groups: what to cut, when, who, at what prices, what to do with the revenues, protection, regeneration, etc
In the Philippines and China, there are now major moves towards devolution of forest management responsibility and authority to local people, as individuals or as communities (assisted by experienced NGOs in the Philippines). Under the old Philippines legislation, local people were permitted to deliberately clear forest for settlement, but not to commercially utilise forests as a sustainable livelihood.
The directions of the Philippines, China, Nepal and to a lesser extent India - who are devolving "forestry" vigorously - contrasts with Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia where current conditions may not necessitate such radical reforms.
There are risks attached to the devolution of management to local communities, but in some cases it could hardly be less successful than the status quo. The origin of these reforms comes from a "people-centred" approach to forestry: concentration on the achievement of welfare goals, rather than the measurement of inputs and outputs in the forest management process. "The only way to keep our natural forests is through sustainable use of direct benefit to local people - if they do not derive any benefits, the forests are unlikely to survive." Such benefits do not come mainly through logging; other products may be more valuable per unit weight, more labour-intensive, more diverse and less environ men tally destructive. However, this potential remains largely unproven. What are the prospects for generating rural incomes and employment through careful harvesting of the Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP)? Is there a danger that increased commercialisation may threaten their
existence, at least in the short run before their production becomes "domesticated"? If that happens, will there still be any demand for the wild materials collected from the forests by local people?
4.3 Farm forestry
Promotion of farm forestry, agroforestry, trees to support and sustain agricultural productivity, and trees in household farming systems is definitely important throughout the region, particularly in Pakistan, the Philippines, Bangladesh, Nepal, India and China. It is low priority in Indonesia & Malaysia, because of the abundant natural forests (in most but not all regions), their focus on industrial' forestry, and because, in Malaysia especially, few people wish to remain (semi-subsistence) farmers.
The viability of farm forestry to produce logs for sale, depends on log prices and farmers often have to compete with "State Forestry". Some governments seem unaware that under-pricing of the logs from state forests has serious negative consequences for private tree-farming that they claim to be promoting. Yet in many countries the extension strategy of assisting poor and marginal farmers to grow their own forest produce is already failing visibly. Apart from deficiencies of the extension delivery system, the quality of the message and of the messenger, there may well be many reasons why allocating household effort to tree-growing is simply not a viable alternative option for the household. Policy research could reveal the impediments to adoption, and enable more efficient targeting of assistance measures.
Farms are not charitable institutions. Telling farmers they should plant trees for "the national interest" to "save the environment" or to "stop global warming" is unlikely to be effective. However, where farmers see tree-growing can fit in with their existing activities in a way that is not too risky or too expensive, and will generate real benefits for them, they generally adopt tree-growing spontaneously. The benefits may be the profit from sale of timber, but it could be through the increased yields of crops and livestock as a result of shelter from winds, reduction in soil erosion, amelioration of soil salinity or acidity, etc. Groves of well-selected and well-maintained trees will even increase the capital value of a farm if it has to be sold. In richer countries, the major benefit that private forest owners seek may be aesthetic or recreational - as the Japan paper notes, 95% of private forest owners rarely make commercial sales!
Foresters have to work with farmers and landowners, to know their needs and how forestry and agriculture can be mutually beneficial. Agro-forestry and tree-growing outside Reserved Forests is not just for farmers, but by them. Farmers will make the decisions about what to produce and how - government officials can support, permit or impede, but not do it.
<section>6</section>
5. The policy formulation-implementation-monitoring process
5.1 Policy research
5.2 Institutional support and reform
In the three preceding sections, I have argued that if policies and strategies are not soundly based, it will prove very difficult to implement them successfully. Moreover, if there is not broad public and political support, it will be very difficult to implement them successfully, even if the policies themselves are correct. Both these arguments can be seriously addressed (but of course not totally solved) by a broadly-based participatory process that clearly defines the roles and contributions expected from all parties concerned.
Thus formulating, implementing and monitoring forestry policy is a dynamic process - it is subjected to extraneous and often unpredictable international and intersectoral events, as well as by the local experiences in practice. Policy formulation and forestry sector planning should not be done only by an isolated cell in the backrooms of the Ministry. Strengthening national capacity for forestry policy formulation and implementation, means more than technical and planning skills. While such people can certainly contribute analysis into the process, the real need might be for a capacity to manage the consultative process that defines and formulates policy (and gathers information and understanding, and indirectly provides the public support to get it implemented).
5.1 Policy research
Many outsiders detect a "disharmony between policy and reality" which those directly involved may not recognise. Before identifying policy research priorities, do we really want objective policy research? Are we concerned about:
"What the policies ought to be?"
"What instruments work efficiently?"
"How to implement policy more effectively?"
Can we admit that there are problems and concede that existing polices (and the strategies that flow from them) are not optimal, but may in fact be the source of some problems. Only the China and Philippines papers concede that there are serious deep-seated institutional and policy problems - not just minor technical questions or a shortage of funds!
Research can be "applied problem-solving". If we monitor what is happening and decide it is not good enough, we should seek reasons and explore alternatives - open-minded, exploratory, nothing taken for granted just because it is the status quo.
5.2 Institutional support and reform
Few organisations (anywhere) are prepared to willingly relinquish authority, or to overturn the status quo even in the face of visible failures. Why should influential Forest Department bureaucracies, in any country, voluntarily relinquish power, especially over vast areas of land, even if management is difficult, degradation is occurring, or it has been occupied by farmers for years?
Again the Philippines, where the foresters are incorporated within DENR (and have lost much of their autonomy) seems to point a way ahead. Perhaps in other countries, if governments look critically at the performance of "State Forestry", similar institutional reforms may be imposed.
Most agencies are in favour of Human Resources Development, although some institutions retain old or colonial procedures (in staff selection, promotion, training programs) which are incompatible with modern Western approaches to HRD. Effective policy implementation cannot be separated from "management for results" and continuous monitoring. This requires all staff to be performance- and results-oriented, and internal management procedures must provide an appropriate incentive structure. We have often discussed the difficulties in attracting high-calibre staff, particularly with multi-disciplinary expertise, when salaries and/or status are relatively low, yet some Forestry Departments fail to deploy their existing staff effectively, and to use all the talents and skills these people have, because of bureaucratic constraints which may be quite unnecessary or counter-productive.
<section>7</section>
6 Conclusions
There have been major advances in the past decade, away from 1950s thinking about the role and contribution of forestry in development, in some cases even from older colonial policies. Nevertheless, there is a need for continuing policy reform or refinement, and the question thus arises, who should drive it and in what directions? The whole process of formulating Forest Policy could become more democratic, more broadly-based and multi-sectoral (as in Pakistan and the Philippines). The policy formulation process may take longer, but the result will probably be more realistic, effective and workable.
Common underlying policy issues throughout the Country Papers include:
the integration of national forestry sectors into the world market economy, without first having clearly defined and enforceable property rights over forests and forest lands. Where State ownership has been claimed but was not enforceable for technical or administrative reasons, landuse conflicts arose, which underlie some deforestation. Perhaps no-one (loggers, squatters, indigenous people or Forestry Agency) really has secure enforceable property rights and managerial responsibility, which militates against long-term stewardship of forests. If forestry agencies do not have the resources to use and protect territory they claim, perhaps they should hand over the lowest priority areas and concentrate on managing a smaller area very well.
the divergence between excessive logging of forests (for commercial gain to both private and government sectors) and protection and sustainable management of forests for the longer-term public good. As the owner of National/state/public forests, some governments have acted as if commercial benefits are top priority - social benefits of watershed protection and the importance attached by indigenous peoples seem to be consistently underestimated. Log allocation and pricing, and industrialisation subsidies have benefited private individuals at the expense of government revenues and the forest environments.
"Forestry" has been seen as administration of large government estates as a raw material source for large scale (usually private) processing industries. In practice, there has been less time and effort for:
managing social, environmental and off-site impacts, which should also be high priority;
involving local people in the management of government, private or communal forests; or
mediating with agriculture or environment agencies over landuse allocation.
Typically management has been on an area or volume basis, e.g. to maximise the volume of output, rather than the social and economic net value of production.
Much could be learnt from the experience of the Philippines:
In 1908, 80% of the country was under dense forest of valuable species, under state ownership;
The denial of local involvement in forestry damaged traditional management practices and lost some important traditional ecological wisdom;
The first country into large-scale log exports, to earn much-needed foreign exchange, created enormous market opportunities at a time when there were few traditional or modern controls. The major emphasis was on regulation rather than incentives (and disincentives) to achieve voluntary compliance;
Huge concessions were granted to the private sector at very low rents and stumpages, the government assisted with infrastructure and forest inventories;
Despite the introduction later of long-term (25 year) tenures, in practice tenure was still insecure because of political uncertainty (so operators still behaved in very short-sighted ways);
The "command and control" approach extended to industrialisation. Mandatory construction of mills by all concessionaires led to over-capacity, token mills, political games, and generally a gross waste of scarce economic resources. This has been superseded by tax incentives and amendments to foreign investment laws.
Only certain stakeholders dominated - mainly industrial users. Within that group, the owners and the customers counted much more than the workers, the suppliers and local communities. The public at large, the traditional forest dwellers, and the migrants-settlers-squatters were typically ignored and received little benefit. Did government policies and enforcement fail to keep these people out of the forests, or did other government policies encourage or force them to go up into the forests?
Now a radical departure is underway:
devolution of control, responsibility and authority, decentralised decision-making;
recognition of indigenous knowledge of management and use of forests;
community-based forest management often for non-timber outputs, and generally using simple labour-intensive techniques;
increased emphasis on collection of the revenues due to the State from commercial logging.
"Good" results are impossible, if the whole policy framework is distorted. The present problems are more than just technical matters or a shortage of funds or of trained manpower, although of course these are important. To get the policies right we also need improved understanding of how people and institutions behave. Many foresters, and bureaucracies in general, are accustomed to operating in a "command and control" mode, as if all parties involved (stakeholders) will do exactly what they are told, or exactly what the planners expect. Yet many of the parties involved are NOT under control -and so planners need to understand the incentives and disincentives people will voluntarily respond to.
This will also help clarify all the possible implications of the policies and measures proposed, as a check on unintended adverse effects. Accelerated industrialisation could encourage greater illegal logging, or subsidising agriculture or high crop prices could encourage illegal encroachment.
Protection Forestry, Industrial Forestry and Social Forestry have all been tried throughout the region -each has generated some successes and some failures. All have a valid role in specific conditions. The challenge now is to analyse the policy measures that led to the results and to learn from that. In all cases, we can ask:
Is the principle sound?
How complete is our knowledge/understanding of socio-economic processes?
What are the most appropriate means?
What could possibly go wrong?
Can we continuously monitor impacts and progress, and periodically revise as necessary?
Radical reforms of forestry institutions (as in Philippines, India and Nepal) are imminent elsewhere. Forestry agencies need to be more successful in their assigned responsibilities - protecting natural forests and recovering for the public the full economic benefits from the exploitation of those forests.
<section>8</section>
References and sources
delos Angeles, M. & R. Md Idrus, 1990. "Investment Incentives of Southeast Asian Countries in the Wood-based Sector." Proc. of the Malaysian Timber Industry Board Asia-Pacific Conference 1990, Kuala Lumpur. 24-26/9/90.
Arbhabhirama, A. 1988 Thailand Natural Resources Profile. Oxford Univ Press, New York.
Cruz, M.C.J. 1992. Population pressure, economic stagnation and deforestation in Costa Rica and the Philippines. Paper to IUSP Seminar on Population and Deforestation in the Humid Tropics, Sao Paulo Brazil, Nov 1992.
FAO/RAPA, 1987. Expert Consultation on Intersectoral Linkages in Forestry Sector Planning. 3 Vols. Bangkok. Forest Survey of India 1991. Annual Report. Ministry of Environment & Forestry, New Delhi
Gillis, M. 1988. "Indonesia: public policies, resource management and the tropical forest." in R. Repetto and M. Gillis (eds) Public Policies and the Misuse of Forest Resources. World Resources Institute, Cambridge Univ. Press.
Irawanto, D.S. et al 1991. "The Legacy" series of article on Forestry (in Bahasa Indonesia) Tempo 26/10/91
Laird, J. 1991. "Southeast Asia's Trembling Rainforests". Our Planet vol 3 (4): 4-12.
Manasan, R.G. 1989. "A Review of Investment Incentives in ASEAN Countries". Philippines Institute of Development Studies, Working paper 88-27, PIDS, Manila.
Marsono, Djoko, 1990. "Analysis of Policy on Industrial Plantation Estate Development" (original in Bahasa Indonesia) Working Paper No 212, Second Indonesia Forestry Congress, Jakarta 22-25 October, 1990
Myers, N. 1988. Environmental Degradation and Some Economic Consequences in the Philippines. Environmental Conservation Vol 15 No 3 205-214
Ohlsson, B.O. & R.N. Byron 1989. "Learning from the Small farmers about their trees." FAO Forest Trees & People Program. FAO Rome.
Oliva, R.V. 1988. Harmonisation of Forest Policies in the Asean Region. ASEAN Institute of Forest Management, Kuala Lumpur.
Phantumvanit, D. 1990. Natural Resources for a Sustainable Future: Spreading the Benefits. Thailand Development Research Institute, Bangkok.
Poffenberger, M. 1990. Keepers of the Forest: land management alternatives in southeast Asia. Kumarian Press.
Salleh, Md. Nor, 1990. Productivity, Use and Conservation Issues in the Humid Tropics. IUFRO XIX World Congress Report, Montreal. Vol B, 49-53
Westoby. J. 1987. The Purpose of Forests. Blackwell, Oxford
World Bank, 1990. Indonesia: Sustainable development of forests, land and water. IBRD Washington.
World Bank, 1991/2. Environment and Development. The 1992 World Development Report. Washington, DC World Resources Institute, 1991. World Resources Report. 1991. WRI, Washington DC
Forestry Policies
in the Asia-Pacific Region:
